CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 3: The orb and Chumby devices displaying a 
purple color (more than one friend is watching TV).
As our primary ambient display, we chose the Ambient 
Orb, a color changing lamp from Ambient Devices,2 and 
configured it to display the current number of buddies 
watching television. Different colors are used to indicate 
whether one (blue), more than one (purple), or no other 
buddies (yellow) are currently watching TV.
The orb was connected via serial cable to our prototype, 
and therefore had to be placed close to the TV. As people 
often spend much of their time outside of the living room 
[1], we wanted to include a second display for times when 
users could not see the primary ambient display. The 
Chumby3 is a WiFi-enabled internet appliance with a 3.5&quot; 
LCD color display Though we would have preferred to use 
a second orb, the Chumby provided faster updates and more 
reliable wireless reception than the orb’s pager-based 
network alternative. We wrote a Flash widget for the 
Chumby that follows the color of the living room orb in 
near-synchronization (within 15 seconds).
Besides providing information about the number of buddies 
online, we wanted to use the displays to attract users to the 
system when a friend or family member invited them to 
watch a show with them. To signal this, we designed the 
displays to pulse slowly between the current color and 
black. We did not want the flashing to be too distracting, 
but wanted users to notice it so that they could come to their 
televisions if they desired.
Messaging
We provided no voice or freeform text communication 
features. However, users can send ‘suggestions’ to invite a 
buddy to watch their current show together. If the buddy 
accepts the suggestion, the system automatically changes 
the channel to that program.
When two or more buddies are watching the same program, 
the prototype allows them to send messages to each other. 
In the first round of this study, the system allowed only 
three expressions, in the form of graphical thumbs-up, 
thumbs-down, or ‘shout-out’ emoticons. After this 
deployment, we received feedback that our participants 
wanted to send a wider variety of messages. Therefore, for
2 http://www.ambientdevices.com/
3 http://www.chumby.com/
the second group, we implemented a new feature that 
replaced the generic ‘shout-out’ message with 
approximately 20 pre-determined messages such as “How 
is this show?”, “This sucks!”, or “Call me”. A number of 
possible replies are available (“Good!”, “Bad!”, etc.), as 
well as the thumbs-up and thumbs-down emoticons.
RELATED WORK
Social Television Systems and Studies
The idea of communicating and sharing awareness through 
the television set has been explored by a number of 
different researchers. However, social television systems as 
yet remain confined to labs and limited trials. AmigoTV, 
described by Coppens et al. [9], was an early social 
television system that included presence, a buddy list, 
invitations, emoticons, and voice chat, but no facilities for 
indicating presence while offline. Telebuddies, by Luyten et 
al. [21], takes a different approach to the challenge of 
drawing users into the experience, using a friend-of-a-friend 
profile of interests and social relationships to match users 
with suitable communication partners. A more 
comprehensive review of social television systems can be 
found in Harboe et al. [14].
Geerts [14] and Baillie et al. [2] conducted user studies of 
AmigoTV, both of them lab experiments comparing voice 
communication to other modalities. Weisz et al. [29] and 
Regan and Todd [24] examined groups or pairs of friends 
and strangers using text chat while watching videos or TV 
together. Similarly, Oehlberg et al. studied groups of 
friends and acquaintances watching television, both in 
collocated groups and connected via an audio link [23]. 
Finally, In Harboe et al. we examined friends and family 
watching TV in a voice chat setting; this in the participants’ 
homes rather than the lab [15].
All these studies were based on single-session events. None 
of them looked at the process by which a shared viewing 
experience is initiated or how the systems are used over 
time. However, Boertjes has announced a prolonged in- 
home study of a social television system called ConnecTV 
[5], and we await those results with interest.
Building on this existing work, we are extending the social 
television concept by including additional facilities for 
offline awareness of TV presence information. In addition, 
we are presenting results from the field that that throw light 
on the real-world use of television-based sociability, and 
which suggest design considerations for future social 
television systems.
Social Awareness Systems for the Home
Hindus et al. created and evaluated a number of social and 
communication systems, with varying levels of media 
richness, for the home [18]. They note that consumers 
wanted devices with multiple communication modes.
In the context of domestic video calling over the TV, 
Hemmeryckx-Deleersnijder and Thorne integrated an
3
