CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Interaction	Information	Presence specificity	Context detail	What others experience	Degree of
	amount				participation
Noticing ambient display	Bite	Aggregate buddy list (+inferences)	TV is on/off	No presence info	Peripheral awareness
					Full involvement
Viewing buddy list	Snack	Aggregate household (+inferences)	The program(s) being watched	TV is on/watching program	
Co-viewing program			Shared viewing context (common ground)	Sharing the viewing experience	
Exchanging lightweight messages	Meal	Aggregate	Reactions to show, responses to	In contact, communicating	
		household or individual	messages		
Talking on the phone	Feast	Individual	Two-way audio stream	Rich conversation	
Table 3: Different stages of interaction with the system, along with some notable characteristics.
Users can move freely between the various interaction 
levels, as their needs and interest dictate. However, each 
stage provides impulses that encourage deeper engagement, 
playing on such traits as curiosity and desire to express 
opinions, and guides users towards the ultimate state of live 
conversation, which here takes the form of phone calls.
Improving the Quality of Time Spent Watching TV
We see that the ambient information is intimately bound up 
with the social functionality available on the TV. Although 
our participants found the ambient data interesting in the 
context of the Social TV 2 system, the information would 
be nearly meaningless on its own; “a tease.” If the ambient 
displays extend the social television experience outside of 
the TV set, the other features help users interpret the 
ambient signals and provide the information with a purpose. 
They make it actionable.
Furthermore, as social presence information is made 
actionable through the TV, turning on the TV becomes 
redefined as a social act: “Even before I turned on the TV, I 
knew that someone was on there.” Because the ambient 
devices provide users with at least peripheral awareness of 
their buddies’ presence information, there is now an 
unavoidable social dimension to pressing that button, such 
as expectations of availability. And even if users should be 
oblivious, turning on the TV affects their buddies’ ambient 
displays and presence view, making them aware. We saw 
this social consideration give rise to new behaviors such as 
turning on the TV when the ambient devices showed other 
people online.
The methods of our study do not allow us to say with 
confidence whether Social TV 2 caused our participants to 
watch more TV, or keep their TV on more. For that, a 
control condition would be required. Certainly some of our 
findings suggest that it might be the case. However, in light 
of the above, direct comparisons may not be particularly 
meaningful. To watch Social TV 2 is not merely to 
consume entertainment, but to engage in communication
with friends and family that can bring you closer together, 
reaffirm social ties, and let you get to know each other 
better. The ambient displays provide a first point of contact 
for TV-based conversations, and help establish a social 
mindset around the very notion of television.
This insight suggests that different systems could use 
ambient displays to emphasize specific features, by 
preparing the user’s frame of mind in advance of their 
active interactions.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we have presented results from testing a social 
television system with an ambient component for social 
presence. On the whole, our participants liked the idea of 
having the TV watching activities of their social groups 
represented in ambient displays. Presence information was 
understood and used as a proxy for who was home and 
available. More importantly, it worked to support the 
experience of communicating through the television.
Most social television research to date has focused on what 
happens once people are engaged in a social television 
experience. There has been little research into how such 
sessions would be initiated, and how they can be made to fit 
into the context of everyday activities. Our study addresses 
these issues: Designs based on ambient displays offer a 
credible answer, and our field study showed one such 
design to perform well in practice. Since the same concerns 
are relevant to a wide class of other in-home social systems, 
this finding holds more general interest.
FUTURE WORK
One of the most interesting questions raised by this study is 
how the addition of social awareness will affect pre-existing 
patterns of behavior around TV viewing. The effect is 
profound, and some simple examples are clearly evident in 
the data. However, we suspect that the altered social 
dynamic of TV viewing could have far more complex and 
subtle effects, especially as the presence awareness 
increases the visibility of TV viewing habits to oneself and
9
