CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
participants confused pulsing with just changing colors. For 
example, B3 said “I’m not sure if it was pulsating or just 
changing purple to blue, to purple to blue [ ... ] I honestly 
don’t know...” This may partly have been a problem of 
terminology. More substantially, at least part of the reason 
for the confusion was that few participants saw the pulsing 
happen. Most invitations were sent to people who were 
already watching TV, and who accepted or declined them 
before they had a chance to notice the ambient devices 
pulsing. Another likely contributing factor was the subtlety 
of the signal: “I love the orb, but when it flashes, I wish it 
flashed a different color or did something crazy. I can’t tell 
when it’s flashing sometimes.” (A2)
A number of participants reported that they were less aware 
of the Chumby than of the orb. As B3 said: “I think it&apos;s kind 
of a non-entity, the Chumby.” A few different factors 
appeared to contribute to this. In daylight, the Chumby’s 
small LCD screen was only clearly readable from certain 
angles, so participants were unable to see it from some 
areas of the room where it was installed. In a few 
households, the Chumby was redundant because 
participants could also see the orb from most places where 
they could see the Chumby. Finally, the Chumbies used 
were pre-production models prone to technical glitches and 
service interruptions, so for nearly all of the participants the 
Chumby did not work properly for parts of the study. 
Nevertheless, the Chumby played an important part of the 
experience for certain participants: For example, A1 told us 
“Since I had [the Chumby] in the kitchen it was just while I 
was cooking...it was like ‘oh, I wonder who’s on.’ ”
Placement
As noted by others [8, 26], we found that the ambient 
displays needed to be located where they would frequently 
be seen. B1 mentioned, “The physical positioning in my 
house [for the Chumby] was the perfect spot, because I 
spend most of my day in the kitchen when I’m home.” In 
two households, participants chose locations for the 
Chumby where they rarely spent time or passed by. “The 
orb was a lot more helpful than the Chumby. [ ... ] Because 
we’re down here more.” (B2) A5 did not regard the 
displays as particularly useful. This may have been the 
result of physical context, as both were put in her brother’s 
bedroom. When we asked her if she ever saw the orb go 
purple when she wasn’t watching TV, she replied “Uh, no, 
because if I was in that room, I knew I’m gonna be 
watching TV.”
Acceptability of form factor
The majority of our participants liked the form factor of the 
displays. We received numerous comments such as “I love 
the orb” (B5), and “I like the orb, I like the Chumby... the 
colors and the blinking” (A2). A3 and A4 both called the 
orb “cool” and B4 said it was “neat.” Even when the 
novelty of the system wore off and some participants were 
saying that interacting with the on-screen application was a 
“chore” (B5), their enjoyment of the orb continued to the
end. It should be noted that the acceptance wasn’t universal; 
A1’s husband complained that the orb did not go with their 
décor, but “if it was a little bit smaller I think it would look 
fine.”
Drawing Users into Communication
Although the ambient devices provided effective social 
presence, our participants felt that the orb and Chumby 
would not be useful by themselves without the rest of the 
information the Social TV 2 system provided. “It would be 
pretty, but I couldn’t see what people were doing,” said A3. 
B1 commented that “There’d be no reason to have an orb 
and then I can’t turn it on and see who it’s connected to.” 
A2 thought that without the additional information of who 
was watching, and what they were watching, “it would be a 
tease.” Balancing this, several of our participants said that 
at times they were just interested in learning that a friend 
was at home and available, not specifically whether he or 
she was watching television.
We saw further evidence that the ambient information did 
help to involve them in the social television experience. 
Many of our participants told us of occasions when they 
turned on the TV because the orb indicated that others were 
watching. For example, A2 told us “as soon as I come into 
the house or I wake up or come into the room, that’s the 
first thing. It draws my attention, and the first thing I do is 
turn on the TV.” In a voice mail, A3 told us that the orb 
“has made me a little bit more aware, makes me want to, 
when it does change colors, to see which of my buddies are 
on.”
In some cases the participants switched on the TV just to 
see who was there, then turned it off. However, more often 
they would contact or be contacted by one of their friends, 
or simply go on watching the TV show. A2 told us that she 
would turn on the TV “just to see who’s on, and then most 
of the time we would all end up watching the same thing.” 
This usually involved exchanging lightweight messages: 
“Find out what other people are watching, flip to what 
they’re watching, and then talking to some of the people to 
throw comments out.” (B3)
In a number of cases, the people who described watching 
TV with their buddies and messaging them were people 
who were doing similar things prior to the study. For 
example, the sisters A2 and A5 told us that they often 
watched TV shows together, and A2 mentioned receiving a 
text message from her sister while they were both watching 
the season finale of Gilmore Girls. Regarding our system, 
she said: “The first thing I do is see what my buddies are 
watching, and then I tend to sometimes watch what they’re 
watching and then give suggestions or thumbs up or down 
depending on how I feel toward their program.”
Interestingly, people who used to watch TV with others 
remotely found themselves doing so again once the Social 
TV 2 system was in their homes. B 1 told us how, years ago, 
she and her close friend B2 would “watch Saturday Night
6
