CHI 2008 Proceedings · Help Me Search	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
		Messages				
		T4	T2	T3	T4a	T4b
	S1	0	1	0	1	0
	S2	1	0	1	0	0
	S3	1	0	1	0	1
Table 1. A matrix representing the pivot from software 
modules to conversation messages that reference them. 
Target messages T4a and T4b are from the same thread.
More formally, we define a pivot as a function that maps 
from source items to subsets of a set of target items. The 
pivots can be represented as a matrix P, with one row for 
each source item and one column for each target item. Each 
cell in the matrix indicates whether the source and target are 
related (i.e., share a “common attribute”).
In the case of conversation pivots for software modules, the 
source items are pages describing software modules and the 
targets are messages. A cell’s value encodes whether the 
message mentions the software module. For example, as 
shown in Table 1, message T3 refers to the software 
module that page S1 describes but not the modules 
described by pages S2 and S3.
Depending on the application, it may be useful to 
automatically display on a source page a pivot block with 
links to a few targets. In other applications, users may need 
to explicitly request that related targets be displayed. This is 
common, for example, in tagging interfaces, where a user 
has to click on a tag before the set of related items is 
displayed. In either case, if too many target items are 
related to a single source, it is helpful to order them based 
on which are likely to be most useful when navigating from 
that source item. To accommodate that, a cell in the pivot 
matrix can contain a similarity or relevance score based on 
frequency or prominence of the reference, rather than just a 
binary indicator of a reference to the source item.
We have implemented, but not yet publicly released 
conversation pivot blocks for two popular software 
platforms, Drupal and CPAN. On the Drupal.org website, 
there is a page for each of the hundreds of available add-on 
modules. The Related Discussion block, on the top right in 
Figure 1, will add links to related conversations that occur 
in the Drupal forums, elsewhere on the site. Each link is to 
an entire thread, scrolled to the first message in the thread 
that references the module.
For the programming language Perl, there are thousands of 
software libraries, also referred to as modules, that 
programmers can download from a site called CPAN. Each 
module gets its own page on CPAN, with information about 
its history and status and a link to download the actual code. 
We have focused on an experimental mirror site called 
AnnoCPAN that displays user annotations on the module 
pages. The CPAN and AnnoCPAN sites do not host
Figure 1. The Drupal.org website with (A) pivot to 
related conversations and (B) double-pivot to other
conversations about Perl or Perl modules. One popular 
venue for such conversations is a website called Perlmonks. 
We have implemented a conversation pivot block for 
AnnoCPAN that shows links to related conversation threads 
on the Perlmonks website, as shown in Figure 2.
We exploit the structure and chronology of conversation 
threads to help determine which messages are most 
important. Among messages that reference a software 
module, conversations that are longer and more recent are 
more likely to be useful to display in a pivot block. 
Although each link in a pivot block points to a particular 
message in a thread, we compute the message’s importance 
based on features of the entire thread. Our initial 
implementation simply computes a timestamp based on the 
time of the most recent message posted in the thread. 
Among messages that reference the source item, those 
whose threads have more recent activity are shown first.
Without the conversation pivot blocks, people could use a 
search engine to seek forum references to particular 
software modules. This would require significant user 
effort. Moreover, we are able to tune our search algorithm 
to take advantage of the structure of software module pages 
and conversation threads, in a way that would be difficult 
for users to simulate if they had to construct their own 
search queries.
Double Pivots
Any pivot matrix relating source items to subsets of target 
items can be used to generate another pivot matrix relating 
the source items back to subsets of those same source items. 
For example, from the page for a software module, we can 
display a pivot block of other related software modules, as 
shown in the “Related Modules” blocks in Figures 1 and 2. 
This can help users identify complementary modules and
A
B
1010
