CHI 2008 Proceedings · Help Me Search	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Conversation Pivots and Double Pivots
Daniel Xiaodan Zhou, Nathan Oostendorp, Michael Hess, Paul Resnick
CommunityLab*
University of Michigan School of Information
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
{mrzhou, oostendo, mlhess, presnick}@umich.edu
ABSTRACT
Many sites on the web offer collaborative databases that 
catalog items such as bands, events, products, or software 
modules. Conversation pivots allow readers to navigate 
from pages about these items to conversations about them 
on the same site or elsewhere on the Internet. Double pivots 
allow readers to navigate from item pages to pages about 
other items mentioned in the same conversations. Using 
text mining techniques specific to the collection it is 
possible to find references to collected items in online 
conversations. We implemented conversation pivots for the 
CPAN archive of Perl modules, and for Drupal.org, the 
reference site for the Drupal content management system.
Author Keywords
Online Discussion, Conversation, Recommender, Pivot, 
Drupal, Perlmonks
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.4 Hypertext/Hypermedia Navigation. H5.2. User 
Interfaces
INTRODUCTION
Many websites maintain collections of pages about people, 
places, and things. These item pages typically include 
structured data. The sites also frequently include online 
forums, with an abundant and unstructured repository of 
user-contributed data about the same items. Drenner et al 
[1] describe these areas as “item-land” and “forum-land”, 
and describe how the site MovieLens was able to cross-link 
them. Movie item pages have links to conversation threads 
mentioning the movies and conversation pages link to the 
referenced movie pages.
More generally, item-land describes a large variety of 
online collections:
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00
•	Musician profiles on MySpace.com or Last.fm
•	Concert or other event listing in a public calendar
•	Wikipedia entries for people, places, or things
•	Product pages (e.g., on Amazon.com)
•	Software module pages on a repository such as PEAR
or CPAN
It is easy to imagine how bridges between “item-land” and 
“forum-land” could be very useful in these contexts, 
especially when “forum-land” might be separate from the 
item collection (i.e., on a separate website.)
While previous work has explored the connections in the 
case of movie items, we explore them in the case of item 
pages that describe software modules. We explain how the 
unique features of software modules and conversation 
threads can be used in inferring links between them. We 
also show how these links can be used not only to help 
navigate from software modules to related conversation but 
also from software modules to related modules.
CONVERSATION PIVOTS
Links between items and forums are instances of a more 
general class of navigation aids that we call pivots. A pivot 
enables navigation from an object to a set of other objects 
that share some attribute in common. Perhaps the most 
familiar instantiation of the pivot concept is the ability, at 
sites such as del.icio.us and Flickr and many individual 
blogs, to click on a “tag” in order to move from one page or 
photo to a set of others that have been classified with the 
same tag. Many other pivots are possible. For example, a 
pivot can allow navigation from a message to other 
messages by the same author, or from an event 
announcement to other events at the same venue, or other 
events at the same time, or other events featuring the same 
speaker.1
* CommunityLab is a collaborative project of the University of 
Minnesota, University of Michigan, and Carnegie Mellon 
University. http://www.communitylab.org/
1 We borrow this usage of the term pivot from spreadsheet 
pivot tables and from the description of features of the Ning 
platform for building social applications. [2]
1009
