CHI 2008 Proceedings · Online Social Networks	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 1. SONARBuddies UI
SonarBuddies is just one example of a potential SONAR 
client. Below, are a few examples of more advanced 
scenarios that SONAR may support:
•	Expertise location (e.g., [14,18,31]) – SONAR, integrated 
with search, may be used for scenarios of expertise location, 
such as the basic “who knows about &lt;topic&gt;?”, but also 
“who do I know that knows about &lt;topic&gt;?”, and the related 
“who do I mostly communicate with about &lt;topic&gt;?”
•	Automatic completion of names (e.g., [21]) and groups–
completing a single string to a name may sort alternatives by 
strength of social ties and relevance to the context. Moreover, 
the completion of a whole group can be supported - e.g., if 
one participates in a project of 10 people, typing the names of 
3 of them may automatically be completed to the entire 
group. This may also be useful for resolving “who&apos;s missing 
from the mail I’m about to send?”
•	Finding social paths to someone who is not directly related
to the user (e.g., [15])
•	Enhancing SN services by recommending people to connect
to based on other evidence and by enriching information 
about existing friends: connection strength, evidence, and 
temporal characteristics of relationships
SONAR EXPERIMENTS
SonarBuddies has been made available for download at the 
IBM intranet and over 1800 users downloaded and used it. 
SonarBuddies is mainly an egocentric application and it 
could be assumed that its success is due to heavy usage of 
private data sources by the users. However, from the usage 
data it is evident that public sources are explored. We 
envision the SONAR API as being heavily used by 
sociocentric applications and thus the interest in public data 
sources was encouraging.
This section states our hypotheses, describes our 
experiments, and discusses the results.
Hypotheses
Public Data Sources
The first group of hypotheses focuses on public data 
sources and their influence on the users’ SN. Public data 
sources are different in nature, ranging from social 
bookmarking systems to blogs and therefore we assume:
(1) Public data sources provide diverse SN information. 
There is no single public data source that holds all SN 
information, and each public source makes a 
significant contribution to the overall SN information.
Moreover, as part of the user activities are performed 
“outside the mailbox”, the public sources provide valuable 
SN information which is not reflected in private sources. 
We thus raise the following 2 hypotheses:
(2) Public data sources provide SN information that is 
valuable to the user.
(3) Public data sources enrich egocentric SN information. 
By combining private sources with public sources, one 
can potentially get a more complete picture of the SN.
Data Source Aggregation
An additional hypothesis focuses on aggregation of SN 
information. A key concept behind SONAR is the ability to 
consolidate social information from multiple data sources, 
assuming that there is real value in such aggregation. The 
following hypothesis is explored:
(4) Aggregated SN information is of greater value to users 
than information that originates from any single source.
A SONAR client based on this hypothesis would need to 
use some weight combination in order to aggregate the 
different sources. While the user may have control over the 
weights, a SONAR client should have a default weight 
combination that would be reasonably good for all users for 
the most common scenario (such as finding the people the 
user communicates with the most). During our experiments, 
we wish to study the following hypothesis:
(5) For a basic scenario, there exists a weighting scheme 
by which an aggregation of data sources most 
reasonably represents most users’ SN.
If this hypothesis is correct, our experiments may reveal the 
weighting scheme that we should use as default.
Finally, an even more valuable aggregation of SNs can be 
achieved if users would share some of their private SN with 
others. While people are hesitant to share their private 
information, they may agree to share the buddylists created 
based on it, and thus allow a sociocentric view that is 
enhanced by private information. We hypothesize:
(6) People would be willing to share the buddylists created 
based on their private sources
Research Method
In order to examine our hypotheses, we conducted three 
experiments on SN information collected by SONAR.
Experiment 1: Information from Public Sources
For the first experiment we gathered information from the 
four public sources. Our goal was to compare the lists of 
connected people from the different sources (hypothesis 
(1)) and show that no source covers the others and may thus 
serve as a single source of information (hypothesis (4)). The 
collaboration tools in IBM, like many Web 2.0 services on
1021
