CHI 2008 Proceedings · Online Social Networks	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
willing to share their lists with anyone. Seven stated that 
they would want to edit first. “I am worried that SONAR 
results are not accurate enough and would like to [ ...] 
make sure the people who see the lists get good lists”, said 
one user. Another user said, at first, “[I am] worried about 
what my buddies would say about me sharing their names”, 
but, after thinking about it he decided that it was harmless 
enough and said he would share his lists. Four users showed 
great openness by declaring that they would share their list 
automatically, without any editing, with anyone. Only one 
user said that he will not share his lists with anyone. One of 
the users summarized these results nicely: “... I think it 
should always be left up to the individual as there are 
dangerous things about SN. [but]... within a company, you 
have to realize you are probably not going to be that 
private”. All in all, hypothesis (6) is supported to a high 
extent. Our results suggest that there is a good chance 
people will be willing to share their private-based 
buddylists after applying some editing to it.
Discussion
Our experiments show that information from public sources 
is very diverse and no single source may provide all SN 
information. While some sources provide communication 
data, others provide similarity data. While reacting to lists 
generated from Dogear, users said: “Far from ideal list”, 
“Over 50% are strangers”. But another user, while 
discussing her usage of SNs described: “if my goal was to 
search for expertise, then I would lean it heavily towards 
social bookmarking and blogs”. It suggests that diverse 
sources can become valuable for diverse tasks. It also 
explains why our hope to locate an optimal default 
combination of weights for aggregation was not fulfilled - 
different users with different views and different needs may 
require different combinations of the sources.
The information extracted from public sources is shown to 
be of value, and while private sources provide better 
information, public sources do contribute additional 
information and create a more complete picture of SNs. The 
value of aggregation is proven both by the diversity of 
public sources and by user votes for aggregated lists.
We saw in our interviews that aggregation and collection of 
SN information becomes crucial in global organizations. 
While analyzing the organizational chart data source one of 
the users noted: “It just looks at people within my world, 
and I deal with a lot of people outside of my function, if you 
will”. Another user commented: “Names that were missing 
on email appear now. Top person on ideal list does not 
appear here”. It shows that no single data source is 
sufficient for creating one’s ideal buddylist and thus 
demonstrates the value of aggregation.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present the motivation and challenge for 
aggregating SN information from multiple data sources. We 
describe SONAR, an API for exposing relations embedded
in numerous applications or services. SONAR allows 
building weighted networks with evidence for each 
connection, showing how strongly people are connected. 
SONAR was implemented for various sources, public and 
personal, within IBM, and demonstrated through a plugin 
for Lotus Sametime: SONARBuddies.
Our experiments indicate that aggregation produces a more 
comprehensive SN. Information coming from public data 
sources is shown to be relevant and diverse. Public sources 
mainly represent new emerging social technologies on the 
Web. We believe that people’s involvement in these 
technologies will continue to grow, while new technologies 
appear. Hence, more quality social information will be 
available for frameworks like SONAR. For some users, 
public sources make a significant contribution over private 
ones, which may have been considered the predominant 
sources. It is extremely interesting to continue examining 
the potential of public sources to actually replace SN 
information currently extracted from private sources, and 
thus relieving privacy issues.
This paper focuses on general SNs. In practice, there are 
different types of SNs, which reflect different semantics of 
connections, like friendship, interpersonal communication, 
or similarity. Such networks tend to be semantically 
different even for the same user. Shared bookmarks, for 
instance, reflect similarity between users rather than a direct 
connection. The scenario used in our experiments asked the 
users to rank buddylists, typically used for communication. 
It was natural that Dogear, which exposes similarity, 
received low scores by our users. One could think of 
different scenarios, such as finding potential people for a 
community on a specific topic, where this similarity 
network would be a perfect networking tool. It would be 
interesting to identify different scenarios and examine the 
contribution of different sources to them.
Another interesting direction is deriving contextual 
networks – networks that are related to a specific context or 
term. For example, the list of people with whom one 
communicates most frequently about Java, is likely to be 
different from the list of people with whom one 
communicates mostly about SN analysis.
Our plans for future work on the SONAR API include 
extending it to support different types of relations (e.g., 
familiarity vs. similarity). We also plan to allow a 
specification of a search term to support contextual queries 
such as: “who is most related to &lt;person&gt; w.r.t. &lt;topic&gt;?” 
These extensions would allow us to further explore the 
variety of SNs, the differences and relations among them, 
the value they bring to users, and the patterns of their usage.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to acknowledge all those who installed 
SONARBuddies and provided us with feedback about its 
usage. We are especially grateful to those who participated 
in our experiments and interviews. We thank James Snell
1025
