CHI 2008 Proceedings · Online Social Networks	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
[30]. In addition, data mining can discover subtle details of 
a relationship that a person may not be able to provide 
accurately. For example, the rate of email communication 
can be used to estimate the strength of social ties [19].
Email is commonly used to extract SNs. Extraction of the 
sociocentric SN from email logs has been demonstrated in 
[28] in order to automatically identify communities. Other 
tools, such as ContactMap [19] and Personal Map [8], 
analyze emails to extract the user’s egocentric SN. Email is 
one of the important sources for SONAR, but it is definitely 
not the only one. SONAR’s philosophy states that there is 
much important social information outside the inbox.
Another common source for SN information is the Web. 
Adamic et al. [1] describe techniques for mining links and 
text of homepages to predict social relationships. The 
strength of a connection between two people can be 
estimated by querying a search engine with their names and 
checking for web pages where they co-occur [14,17]. Since 
various data sources such as papers, organizational charts, 
and net-news archives are available on the internet or 
intranet, they too could be mined by web searching [14]. 
SN extraction has been conducted on many other sources, 
including Usenet data [27] and Instant Messaging logs [25].
Public vs. Personal Data Sources
Sociocentric network approaches may encounter difficulties 
using personal data sources due to privacy concerns. For 
example, mining email, even when results are displayed in 
aggregated forms, might expose private information [14].
One solution is to limit data mining to public sources. For 
example, Aleman-Meza et al. [2] chose to aggregate only 
publicly available SN data due to privacy concerns. 
However, ignoring private information may exclude 
important data. An alternative solution is to have users opt- 
in to explicitly give permission to make certain private 
information public. For example, Smarr [26] suggests 
requiring users to opt-in to publish their information to a 
public Friend of a Friend (FOAF) file [10]. However, opt-in 
requires action and motivation on the part of users – so 
those publishing their FOAF files will cover only a small 
percentage of organization members.
SONAR can aggregate both private and public sources, 
without exposing private data to other people, or requiring 
users to opt-in.
Aggregating SN Data from Different Sources
No single archive or tool captures all our social relations 
with others. Aggregating SN data from several sources may 
improve the completeness of constructed SNs. For example, 
the ContactMap developers plan to extend their email 
mining tool to use sources such as voice mail and phone 
logs due to user complaints on the absence of phone-based 
contacts [19].
Several tools combine different sources to generate better 
SNs. In [5], an email database is used to extract people
names and email addresses – these are then searched on the 
Web, to extract keywords and to find additional related 
people for which the search is recursively applied. Web 
mining, face-to-face communication, and manually entering 
one’s SN are combined in [12] to construct the SN in a 
Japanese conference.
A basic problem of aggregation is deciding on the 
algorithm to be used for combining data from various 
sources. A simple approach is to compute the aggregation 
as a linear combination of the individual sources. Cai et al. 
[4] propose a method for learning the optimal linear 
combination given input from the user that describes the 
user’s expectation. However, this method requires the user 
to specify the query in ways which may prove to be 
complex. Matsuo et al. [16] extract and integrate SNs from 
several different sources. They provide a rough sketch for 
integrating the networks into a single one by using a linear 
combination of the different networks. Our research tests 
whether there is a weighting scheme which is appropriate to 
most users, for a specific scenario.
Evaluation of Social Network Quality
A common approach for validating an automatically 
constructed SN is to ask the people in the network about its 
correctness, usually by questionnaires that require rating 
various aspects of the SNs and/or providing open-ended 
feedback [8,19,28].
Another possible approach used in SNA is to compare the 
automatically constructed network to external data. For 
example, Aleman-Meza et al. [2] detect conflict of interests 
between paper authors and referees by integrating data from 
several SNs. Their evaluation included comparison to data 
from an external source: a different existing system for 
detecting conflict of interest. The problem with this method 
of evaluation is that it is possible only if there exists a 
relevant external source, which can be used for comparison.
This paper includes three types of evaluation. In the 
absence of an external source to compare to when 
evaluating an aggregated network, our first evaluation 
compares the networks obtained from individual sources to 
the other sources, to measure their uniqueness. The second 
evaluation is a user evaluation, where we evaluate and 
compare numerous linear combinations of different sources. 
The third evaluation employs interviews in order to receive 
user feedback on individual sources and their aggregation.
SONAR IN DETAIL
The purpose of the SONAR API is to provide open 
interfaces to SN data, “locked up” in a multitude of 
systems. SONAR specifies a way to share weighted SNs as 
relation lists. Clients may retrieve information about how 
people are connected based on different parameters. Like 
RSS, our goal is to make a read-only interface, simple to 
implement by the provider and consume by the client.
1019
