CHI 2008 Proceedings · Online Social Networks	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Harvesting with SONAR - The Value of Aggregating Social
Network Information
Ido Guy, Michal Jacovi, Elad Shahar,
Noga Meshulam, Vladimir Soroka
IBM Haifa Research Lab
Mt. Carmel, Haifa 31905, Israel
{ido, jacovi, elads, noga, vladi} @il.ibm.com
ABSTRACT
Web 2.0 gives people a substantial role in content and 
metadata creation. New interpersonal connections are 
formed and existing connections become evident. This 
newly created social network (SN) spans across multiple 
services and aggregating it could bring great value. In this 
work we present SONAR, an API for gathering and sharing 
SN information. We give a detailed description of SONAR, 
demonstrate its potential value through user scenarios, and 
show results from experiments we conducted with a 
SONAR-based social networking application within our 
organizational intranet. These suggest that aggregating SN 
information across diverse data sources enriches the SN 
picture and makes it more complete and useful for the end 
user.
Author Keywords
Social networks, SN, social network analysis, SNA, 
aggregation.
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.3 Group and Organizational Interfaces – Computer- 
supported cooperative work
INTRODUCTION
Social software – software that has people as its focal point 
– is the core of Web 2.0. From blogs and wikis through 
recommender systems to social bookmarking and personal 
network systems – social applications proliferate. In 
continuation to its dominance on the internet, social 
software has recently emerged in organizations, as a mean 
of connecting employees in a better way and enhancing 
knowledge management and expertise location. Blogging 
systems [14], social bookmarking [19], and people tagging
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00. 
Stephen Farrell
IBM Almaden Research Center
650 Harry Road, San Jose, California
sfarrell@almaden.ibm.com
[7], are examples of social applications that became part of 
organizations’ intranets in the purpose of promoting intra-
organizational interaction.
Many of these social applications expose interesting 
information about people’s relationships. For example, by 
analysing blog commenters, or bookmarking similarities, 
connections among people can become evident. By 
extracting this information and aggregating it across 
multiple sources, a comprehensive and often intriguing 
picture of individual and organizational social networks 
may be revealed.
Potential sources of social information are very diverse. 
Different users make use of different tools, and social 
information is scattered among many services and 
applications. As these applications rarely interoperate, each 
is typically only aware of its own social data and cannot 
benefit from other applications’ data.
The diversity of sources of social networking data also 
brings a variety of semantics to interpersonal connections. 
While some of these semantics are straightforward and 
derived from the nature of the connection (brother, close 
friend, manager, etc.), others are more complex. Many 
researchers recognized that people are connected through 
artifacts. For example, many studies have investigated 
networks where two people are connected if they have co-
authored a paper [22]. Newer examples of artifacts that 
connect people include email messages [3,28], and web 
pages [14]. Affiliation networks [29] present people’s 
connections through groups in which they co-participate, 
such as a board of directors, or a movie cast [22]. The 
above examples imply that aggregating social network data 
presents the challenge of creating a single framework, 
general yet informative, to fit all types of connections.
To address the above challenges, we introduce SONAR 
(Social Networks Architecture) – an API for sharing social 
network data and aggregating it across applications to show 
who is related to whom and how. Applications 
implementing the SONAR API (SONAR providers) should 
provide internal information about how strongly people are 
connected and by what means. SONAR clients can use the 
SONAR API to access data from a single provider that 
implements the API. However, the more compelling case is
1017
