CHI 2008 Proceedings · Online Social Networks	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
‘Looking at’, ‘Looking up’ or ‘Keeping up with’ People?
Motives and Uses of Facebook
Adam N. Joinson
School of Management
University of Bath
Bath
United Kingdom
BA2 7AA
A.Joinson@Bath.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the uses of social networking site 
Facebook, and the gratifications users derive from those 
uses. In the first study, 137 users generated words or 
phrases to describe how they used Facebook, and what they 
enjoyed about their use. These phrases were coded into 46 
items which were completed by 241 Facebook users in 
Study 2. Factor analysis identified seven unique uses and 
gratifications: social connection, shared identities, content, 
social investigation, social network surfing and status 
updating. User demographics, site visit patterns and the use 
of privacy settings were associated with different uses and 
gratifications.
Author Keywords
Social networking sites, uses and gratifications, motivation
ACM Classification Keywords
H1. Models and Principles: User/Machine Systems; H5.m. 
Information interfaces and presentation: Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
Social networking sites such as MySpace, LinkedIn and 
Facebook have become hugely popular in the last few 
years. In July 2007, social networking sites occupied five of 
the top fifteen visited websites according to Alexa.com. On 
July 10, 2007, Facebook.com reported signing up its 30 
millionth user, with a year on year increase in unique users 
of 89% [12]. In the UK, use of Facebook increased by 
500% between November 2006 and May 2007 [19]. 
MySpace is reported (although disputed [10]) to have over 
100 million users [4].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00. 
Social networking sites typically provide users with a 
profile space, facilities for uploading content (e.g. photos, 
music), messaging in various forms and the ability to make 
connections to other people. These connections (or 
‘friends’) are the core functionality of a social network site 
[5, 6] although most also provide opportunities for 
communication, the forming of groups, hosting of content 
and small applications.
Given the growth of social networking sites, it is perhaps 
unsurprising that their use has garnered media attention, 
including the seemingly now obligatory scare stories 
involving predatory child sex offenders [20], identity theft 
[1], workplace usage levels [9] and even addiction [8].
In many recent cases, this coverage has focused on 
Facebook.com, which was originally restricted to users with 
an ‘.edu’ e-mail address. In September 2006, Facebook 
opened registration to non-college based users. This change 
led to rapid growth in the number of users, as well as 
almost viral growth within non-educational organizations. 
For instance, the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) 
network (which requires a BBC email address) has circa 
10,000 members, approximately 50% of employees [21]. 
Since May 2007, Facebook has also allowed the 
development and implementation of third-party applications 
(see dev.facebook.com).
Before opening to non-academic (and non-US-based) users, 
Facebook.com was peculiar amongst social networking 
sites since many of the social networks its users built were 
based on offline, geographically confined groups (e.g. a 
campus). Termed ‘networks’ by the site (which have 
recently expanded to include non-university based 
geographic areas and workplaces), this reflection of the 
offline community in the online environment may have led 
to unique forms of use amongst users [17].
User motivation and social networking sites
Social networks serve a number of functions in offline life – 
for instance, providing social and emotional support, 
information resources and ties to other people [25]. Similar 
kinds of social networks have been identified in online
1027
