CHI 2008 Proceedings · Online Social Networks	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
communities [7, 25], with users turning online for both 
emotional support and as an information resource (e.g. via a 
mailing list). In both cases, an online social network may 
provide users with social capital [7].
Online social networking sites may also serve a number of 
other purposes [5, 16]. Lampe et al. [16] draw a distinction 
between the use of Facebook for ‘social searching’ – 
finding out information about offline contacts, and ‘social 
browsing’ – the use of the site to develop new connections, 
sometimes with the aim of offline interaction. A survey of 
over 2,000 students, found evidence that the primary use of 
Facebook was for ‘social searching’ – that is, using 
Facebook to find out more about people who they have met 
offline, or who they attend class or share a dormitory with 
[16]. The use of Facebook for ‘social browsing’, for 
instance, to meet someone via the site with the intention of 
a later offline meeting, or to attend an event organized 
online, scored relatively low amongst their sample. The 
main use reported by the sample studied by Lampe et al. 
[16, see also 7] was to, “keep in touch with an old friend or 
someone I knew from high school”, an activity that while 
expressing the offline aspects of social searching, also 
suggests a social capital function for Facebook. Golder et 
al. [11] report that while the vast majority of messages are 
sent to friends (90.6%), a large proportion (41.6%) is sent 
to friends outside of one’s local network. This suggests that 
messaging is used to maintain and build social ties across 
distances. In comparison, ‘pokes’ (a form of content-free 
messaging) were primarily exchanged within a network / 
school (98.3% of all pokes were within a network). Golder 
et al. [11] argue that friendship ties require little effort or 
investment to maintain, while messaging with 
geographically distant friends is used to build social capital 
[7].
According to Lampe et al. [16], social networking sites like 
Facebook may also serve a surveillance function, allowing 
users to “track the actions, beliefs and interests of the larger 
groups to which they belong” (p. 167). The surveillance and 
‘social search’ functions of Facebook may, in part, explain 
why so many Facebook users leave their privacy settings 
relatively open [13]. If ‘social searching’ is a public good, 
then reciprocity rules would dictate that by enabling a 
degree of surveillance of oneself, one would should also be 
able to engage in reciprocal surveillance of others. For 
instance, Gross and Acquisti [13] report that only 1.2% of 
users changed the default ‘search’ privacy setting, and less 
than 1/2% of users changed the default ‘profile visibility’ 
privacy settings.
Enabling Facebook users who are not currently linked as 
friends to view personal aspects of one’s profile may also 
be a strategy to increase the size of one’s social network. In 
support of this view, [17] report that users completion of 
profile fields that share a common referent (e.g. class, 
hometown) is positively associated with more friends, 
perhaps because such information encourages the 
development of ties based on shared experiences. Profile
elements that focused on individual likes and dislikes did 
not have an association with the number of friends.
As noted earlier, Facebook.com has undergone radical 
change over the last twelve months. By moving outside of 
the US-academic environment and embracing users 
globally and outside of academia, it has not only changed 
the profile of its users, but also the potential motivations for 
their use. While tightly controlled, geographically bounded 
networks based on university affiliation still exist, they are 
dwarfed by networks based outside of academia – for 
instance, as of September 2007, the ‘London’ network has 
over 1 million members, New York over 355,000 and 
Toronto over 800,000. The present paper examines the 
motivations of Facebook users using a ‘uses and 
gratifications’ framework.
Uses and gratifications refer to the ‘how and why’ of media 
use [23]. Specifically, ‘uses and gratifications’ refer to the 
motivations of specific uses, and the satisfaction people 
gain from such use. These gratifications can be divided into 
those based on the content of the media (content 
gratifications) and those based on the actual experience of 
using the media (process gratifications). Typically, content 
gratifications are held to be related to the repeated use of a 
media [18] which for the designers of such systems relates 
to a site’s ‘stickiness’. However, the Internet, and social 
networking sites in particular, also provide communication 
and interaction, unlike many ‘old media’ (e.g. television). 
This led Stafford et al. [23] to propose a third form of 
gratification arising from Internet use: as a social 
environment.
In the present study, the usual two stage approach to 
studying uses and gratification is adopted [3]. In Study 1, 
Facebook users are asked to generate lists of words or 
phrases that describe their uses and gratifications in an 
exploratory way. In Study 2, these terms are subjected to 
factor analysis in order to form grouped profiles of specific 
uses and gratifications.
STUDY 1: EXPLORATORY STAGE
Participants
Participants were 137 Facebook users who responded to a 
request to complete a short online study. The sample 
comprised 53 males and 88 females (Mean age = 26.3 
years). Participants were recruited through a number of 
different methods: postings to the ‘wall’ of three network 
homepages on Facebook (two universities, one regional), a 
paid flyer shown 10,000 times across all networks, and 
links on academic survey websites. The survey was open 
during the first two weeks of July 2007.
Materials
The online survey comprised a series of basic demographic 
questions (e.g. age, gender, occupation, location), alongside 
some measures of use of Facebook (time spent on site each 
week, number of friends linked on site, history of use).
1028
