CHI 2008 Proceedings · Online Social Networks	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
earlier work on traditional media, content gratification 
predicted the amount of time spent on the site. However, 
the use of the site for social investigation, viewing and 
posting photographs and viewing status updates predicted 
the frequency of visits. It would seem from the present data 
that ‘keeping in touch’ may in actuality refer to ‘checking 
up on regularly’, while the ‘stickiness’ of the site (in terms 
of time spent on it) depends on use of the content and 
applications. This insight is clearly important for designers 
of social networking sites and associated content. If repeat 
visits are motivated by different uses and gratifications than 
the amount of time spent on the site, it is important to 
design content gratification alongside the ability to build 
and maintain social connections. It also suggests that the 
furor caused by the introduction of the newsfeed [2] has 
subsided, and been replaced by its new role as a ‘killer 
app’, at least in terms of repeat visits to the site. In many 
ways, this use of Facebook reflects the desire for ‘perpetual 
contact’ [15], and previously supplied by standalone 
services like Twitter [24]. While the social implications of 
this interest in perpetual contact and updates on ‘friends’ 
are beyond the remit of the present paper, it is worth noting 
that an increased awareness of others’ actions has 
potentially important implications for how we relate to 
others, and understand ourselves.
Design Implications
The designers of social networking sites should consider the 
varied uses and gratifications reported by users, and need to 
recognize that not all users have the same uses of a social 
networking site, nor derive the same gratifications from 
their use. For instance, there are clear distinctions between 
the use of Facebook to maintain and re-create connections 
with friends, its use as a surveillance tool and for content 
delivery. There were also differences in reported uses by 
age, gender and occupational status. It may be that different 
demographic groups are motivated to use social networking 
sites for different purposes, with social connectivity and 
perpetual contact motivating younger (and female) users 
more than older (and male) users.
The differing goals for the use of Facebook are reflected not 
only in usage patterns, but also in users’ privacy settings. 
People who have made their privacy settings more 
permissive are more likely to want to meet new people 
(they also score higher on the content gratifications scale). 
This is a designed aspect of the system – in both cases, to 
fulfill one’s goal often requires a more permissive approach 
to profile privacy. Many of the applications are social in 
nature (e.g. comparing oneself with others, asking questions 
to ‘friends’, viewing people from one’s neighborhood), and 
often circumvent elements of the default privacy settings. 
Similarly, if the goal is to meet new people, making one’s 
profile more open than by default allows others pursuing 
the same gratification to view your profile, and presumably 
increases the chances of an interaction. For these users, the 
profile within Facebook is likely to become a key self-
presentation tool, rather than simply a way to ‘keep in 
touch’ with others [6, 26].
Limitations and Further research
The present research is a ‘snap shot’ of Facebook users, and 
further work should consider the possibility of researching 
the development of use over time. In particular, it would be 
of interest to see how people’s uses and gratifications of 
Facebook develop, and if the frequency of visit is motivated 
by ‘perpetual contact’ over time. There is, for instance, 
considerable research in the field of habit formation that 
could inform the study of social network site use. HCI 
research should also consider ways in which the desire to 
meet new people, and to allow oneself to be viewed by 
strangers, can be accommodated in a privacy-protecting 
manner [14]. At present, Facebook has reasonably nuanced 
privacy controls. From the results of the present research, it 
would seem that users are changing the default privacy 
settings in a motivated manner. However, the present study 
only collected reported privacy settings. It would be 
prudent to complete research that actually examined 
settings via automated querying of the site [e.g. 13], or by 
studying a corpus of actual interactions [e.g. 11].
It should also be noted that the nature of the sampling 
method, and the self-selection of respondents, may have 
influenced the pattern of responses and overall levels of 
activity. Future research may wish to study a wider group 
of participants, or attempt to identify patterns of usage 
amongst non-respondents compared to respondents
CONCLUSIONS
Users derive a variety of uses and gratifications from social 
networking sites, including traditional content gratification 
alongside building social capital, communication, 
surveillance and social networking surfing. The different 
uses and gratifications relate differentially to patterns of 
usage, with social connection gratifications tending to lead 
to increased frequency of use, and content gratifications to 
increased time spent on the site. The variety of uses to 
which Facebook is put by its users identifies particular 
challenges for the designers of such sites. For instance, a 
default privacy setting may be too restrictive for users 
seeking to meet new people, or who wish to allow new 
people to discover them.
Since user’s desire to engage in surveillance of their peers 
also motivates the frequency of site visit, this also poses a 
unique challenge in balancing user’s privacy concerns and 
controls with a key raison d’être of social networking sites 
like Facebook. At present, Facebook allows users to 
manage their ‘feed’, removing ‘stories’ as they wish. This 
solution not only provides a degree of privacy control to 
users, but it also enables users to engage with the site as a 
self-presentation tool [26] at numerous levels – not only via 
their profile and network, but also through their activity 
(and the removal of specific ‘stories’). As perpetual contact 
continues to develop, designers will need to face the
1035
