CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
interface of the system uses the standard windows GDI to 
render most graphics, with GDI+ used for more complex 
effects, such as the gradient fills on the extruded arrows. The 
front-end also includes a series of hooks allowing it to be 
driven from synthetic data sets, as this capability was neces-
sary for our user study. In order to modify the datasets in real 
time, Sesame registers several global hotkeys allowing us to 
use a second keyboard to control the data Sesame shows to 
study participants. The Sesame front-end gathers process list 
data; the back-end is used to retrieve network status. It also 
includes a simple open-source firewall that is used to inter-
cept attempts at initiating network connections, and performs 
reverse-DNS and WHOIS lookups to obtain information 
about remote systems. As we did not need complete func-
tionality for our evaluations, certain backend features related 
to firewall operations, process culling, CPU usage, and 
vender verification were not fully implemented, but were 
mocked up in the front end.
USER STUDY
We conducted a study to evaluate how well users could 
judge potential security threats using the visualization 
provided by Sesame. Our primary interest was in how well 
users could cumulatively leverage the concepts presented in 
Sesame to make security-related decisions. We chose to 
evaluate these concepts together rather than piecemeal, as the 
experience of our formative study suggested that the differ-
ent concepts underlying Sesame are heavily interdependent. 
To perform this cumulative evaluation, we asked users to 
make security decisions in an environment with Sesame, as 
well as a more conventional environment using the 
ZoneAlarm firewall instead. To assess users’ understanding 
of the different ideas in Sesame, we asked various questions 
about different parts of the visualization and about why users 
made particular choices. Note that our focus in this study was 
to understand how the quality of decision-making was 
affected by our visual interface, not on evaluating Sesame’s 
efficiency as a UI (whether it allows faster decision-making), 
or its impact on user motivation (whether it incents people to 
be more active in security management); we leave these as 
future work.
Participants
Our study included a total of 20 participants recruited from a 
university campus: 45% female (9 subjects) and 55% male 
(11 subjects). All were undergraduate students; none were 
computer science or computer engineering majors, and none 
considered themselves to be experts in computer operation. 
While those pursuing undergraduate degrees may not ideally 
represent typical users, we found that our participants were 
indeed unfamiliar with basic concepts of computer operation 
such as processes, and security threats such as phishing. We 
therefore felt they were adequately representative. We used 
between-subjects testing, so participants were divided evenly 
between control and experimental groups.
Security Tasks
To determine how well participants could identify security
threats, we gave them several tasks. For each task, they 
effectively had to judge whether a given situation posed a 
security threat. The tasks were based on the types of deci-
sions users must make in real world use; the first four were 
common personal firewall configuration decisions, the latter 
two required judging the authenticity of websites. The tasks 
included: T1) allow or forbid an incoming connection from 
Microsoft.com after clicking on a video player link; T2) 
allow or forbid an outgoing connection from a spyware 
process named loadsys.exe; T3) allow or forbid an incoming 
connection from a bot server requesting connection with a 
bot process named intmonp.exe; T4) allow or forbid an 
outgoing connection from the process named outlook.exe; 
T5) determine if the website claiming to be Mid America 
Bank is a phishing site; T6) determine if the website claiming 
to be CitiBank is a phishing site. T5 and T6 are intentionally 
similar but whereas T5 represents a threat, T6 does not—this 
allows us to test for false positives as well as false negatives. 
We balanced the tasks between situations that are triggered 
by user activity (T1, T5, and T6) and those with no direct 
relationship to the user’s actions (T2, T3, and T4).
Participants performed the security tasks in either the control 
or the experimental environment. The control environment 
was made to reflect the most common configuration used by 
non-experts [15], a typical personal computer with the 
ZoneAlarm firewall. In addition to its ubiquity, we used 
ZoneAlarm in the control because, like Sesame, it provides 
firewall functions and therefore offers many of the same 
actionable controls, and asks many of the same questions, as 
Sesame. It also embodies the textual, indirect interaction 
paradigm employed in most end-user security tools. Further, 
the firewall tasks (T1-T4) were derived from actual prompts 
ZoneAlarm presents to users. Also, rather than use a live 
installation of ZoneAlarm, we made an interactive mockup 
using actual screenshots from ZoneAlarm alerts—this was to 
ensure that we could control the timing and exact content of 
the dialog boxes. We integrated interactive widgets into our 
mockup as well so that it would behave, as well as appear, 
virtually identical to the actual tool.
Participants in the experimental group used the same system 
as those in the control, except that Sesame was provided in 
place of ZoneAlarm. Because Sesame offers an unusual user 
interface, we gave participants about 90 seconds to explore it 
before beginning the tasks. We provided no explanation 
about the meaning of Sesame’s behind-the-desktop visual 
elements; we only demonstrated how one could hover over 
and click on some objects to semantically zoom in on them.
Similarly to ZoneAlarm and other firewalls, for tasks T1-T4, 
Sesame alerted the user to the security situation by bringing 
up a dialog box. From there the user would click a button to 
enter the Sesame UI. For T5-T6, the experimenter explained 
the situation and asked the user to click the always-present 
“Open Sesame” button to enter the Sesame interface.
Study Details
As each participant began the study, they were asked a series
1051
