CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
serve as an affordance for reversibility, and so forth—seems 
particularly important for conveying security state, where re- 
accessibility and intelligibility are especially difficult. We 
believe this to be a severe failing of current firewalls, in 
which settings—once configured—are often difficult to re- 
access.
Third, we believe that metaphorical 3D models may aid in 
helping non-experts understand system information where 
necessary; particularly when it involves concepts underlying 
the desktop metaphor. Such modeling need not be limited to 
a firewall UI. Like file management models (e.g. two file 
folders with pages transferring from one to the other to show 
the status of copying), other system models can be embedded 
in applications, perhaps with individual components rotating 
aside to reveal relevant underlying system information. Our 
study suggests that security information embedded in such a 
model can be effectively leveraged by end-users.
Finally, Sesame shows the viability of direct manipulation 
(DM) in low level, security and configuration interfaces, 
whereas DM is traditionally only used for windowing and 
within applications. We believe that this area is ripe for the 
use of other specific design techniques from the HCI com-
munity, such as the use of 2.5D UI’s to extend the desktop 
metaphor. Our work suggests that users can understand 
relationships between different levels of abstraction through 
such well-proved techniques, even when dealing with the 
complex information necessary for security and system 
decision-making.
CONCLUSION
Sesame brings a direct manipulation graphical interface to 
end-user security to help non-experts make better informed 
security choices. Most prior work in end-user security tended 
to be highly task or threat-specific; or largely text-based 
and/or designed for experts. There are few tools if any which 
focus explicitly on helping non-expert users to better under-
stand the technical, system-level concepts needed to make 
security decisions. With Sesame, we investigate an approach 
to providing non-experts with a general, firewall-like tool 
that addresses a wider range of threats independent of 
specific tasks or applications.
Further, we move toward making system-level concepts 
accessible to non-experts by representing them as concrete 
objects and relating them to more familiar concepts such as 
desktop-level objects and real world abstractions like geo-
graphic locations. In a controlled study, Sesame users were 
more likely to identify security threats accurately than users 
with more typical software environments. Sesame users were 
further able to understand many of the otherwise unfamiliar 
system-level concepts conveyed, suggesting viability to our 
fundamental interface approach. In the future, we plan to 
conduct further studies and explore how better to convey 
those concepts with which users struggled.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank our colleagues at Georgia Tech for their helpful
feedback, in particular, John Stasko and Pixi Lab members; 
and we thank Symantec for their support for this work.
REFERENCES
1. Conti, G., Abdullah, K., Grizzard, J., Stasko, J., Copeland, J., 
Ahamad, M., Owen, H., Lee, C. Countering Security Informa-
tion Overload through Alert and Pack Visualization. IEEE 
Computer Graphics (2006).
2. Dhamija, Rachna, Tygar, J.Doug. The Battle Against Phishing: 
Dynamic Security Skins. Symposium On Usable Privacy and 
Security, (2005).
3. DiGioia, P., Dourish P. Social Navigation as a Model for 
Usable Security. Symposium On Usable Privacy and Security 
(2005).
4. Downs, J. S., Holbrook, M. B., Cranor, L. F. Decision Strate-
gies and Susceptibility to Phishing. Symposium On Usable 
Privacy and Security, (2005).
5. Edwards, W. K., Shehan, E., Stoll, J. Security Automation 
Considered Harmful? NSPW (2007)
6. Flinn, S.A., Flock of Birds, Safely Staged. DIMACS Workshop 
on Usable Privacy &amp; Security Software (2005).
7. Foresti, S., Agutter, J. Visual Correlation of Network Alerts. 
IEEE Computer Graphics (2006).
8. Hutchins, E., Hollan, J., Norman, D. Direct Manipulation 
Interfaces. Human Computer Interaction, 1985. 1: p. 311-338.
9. Know Your Enemy: Tracking Botnets. Honeynet Project and 
Research Alliance. honeynet.org/papers/bots (2005).
10. Nielsen, J., Landauer, T. K., A mathematical model of the 
finding of usability problems. Proceedings of the ACM 
INTERCHI’93 Conference (1993).
11. Shukla, S., Nah, F., Web Browsing and Spyware Intrusion. 
Communications of the ACM.Vol. 48, No. 8 (2005).
12. Smetters, D., Grinter, R. Moving from the Design of Usable 
Security Technologies to the Design of Useful Secure Applica-
tions. NSPW (2002).
13. Spyware. NISCC Technical Note. National Infrastructure 
Security Coordination Centre. (2006).
14. Thorpe, S., Fize, D. &amp; Marlot, C. (1996).Speed of processing 
in the human visual system. Nature, 381, 520-522.
15. Walker, A. Absolute Beginner’s Guide to Security, Spam, 
Spyware &amp; Viruses. Que Publishing, © 2006.
16. Whalen, T., Inkpen, K. Techniques for Visual Feedback of 
Security State. DIMACS Workshop on Usable Privacy and Se-
curity Software (2004).
17. Whitten, A., Tygar, J. Safe Security Staging. CHI 2003 
Workshop on Human-Computer Interaction and Security Sys-
tems (2003).
18. Whitten, A., Tygar, J., Why Johnny Can’t Encrypt. Proc. of the 
8th USENIX Security Symposium (1999).
19. Wu, M., Miller, R. C., Little, G. Web Wallet: Preventing 
Phishing Attacks by Revealing User Intentions. Symposium On 
Usable Privacy and Security, (2006).
20. Wu, M., Miller, R. C., Garfinkel, S., Do Security Toolbars 
Actually Prevent Phishing Attacks? CHI (2006).
21. Yee, K., Sitaker, K. Passpet: Convenient Password Manage-
ment and Phishing Protection. Symposium On Usable Privacy 
and Security, (2006).
22. www.sysinternals.com/Utilities/
1054
