CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 1: The Sesame ‘Behind-the-Scenes’ View running on a live system
We explore this issue of informed security decision making 
through Sesame, an interactive, visual, firewall-like tool 
designed to assist non-experts in making better informed 
security decisions. Sesame addresses threats similar to those 
of consumer firewalls, but uses a visual, direct manipulation 
interface that exposes system-level information in a meaning-
ful, comprehensible way. To this end, Sesame provides users 
a ‘behind-the-scenes’ view of their computer, integrating 
existing elements of the desktop UI (such as windows) with 
previously hidden systems-level components (such as the 
processes that own those windows, the network connections 
those processes are making, and so forth). Essentially, the 
desktop metaphor is extended to convey system-level con-
cepts in terms of their relationship to familiar desktop-level 
abstractions. We conjecture that this view can help to inform 
user security decisions and, by lowering barriers to this 
information, may help to motivate them as well [18].
Our initial study results suggest that this behind-the-scenes 
view of their system’s underlying architecture seems to help 
users make better security decisions involving system-level 
knowledge. In the sections that follow, we briefly survey 
current research and commercial security tools. We then 
describe the design of the Sesame UI and present the results 
of our user study. We conclude with a discussion of our 
study results and implications for future work.
RELATED WORK
While there are many security tools available, few are 
designed specifically to support end-users in their security 
decision making process. However, of the tools available for 
security decision making, many can be grouped into two 
categories: those for expert users and those for non-experts.
Experts
Visualization tools: The majority of prior research focuses on 
visualization-based approaches intended for the expert user. 
While inappropriate for non-experts, they do illustrate types 
of information that experts find useful in order to detect 
security problems and make informed decisions with regard 
to security. For example, many of these tools support moni-
toring of network connections; these include Rumint, IDS 
Rainstorm, VisAlert [7], and others that provide experts with 
a variety of useful network data representations [1]. How-
ever, these tools are highly technical and complex 
(presenting data at the level of individual packets), and do 
not integrate with, or build on, existing metaphors of the 
desktop GUI.
Text-based tools: Another set of very common tools provides 
extensive system behavior and status information in a text- 
based approach. Although these systems often ship on 
consumer computing platforms, they are generally intended 
for knowledgeable users or even system- or network- 
administrators. These include tools like ProcessExplorer, 
tcpview, and Windows Task Manager [22]. Again, these 
tools present system-level information useful in making 
informed security decisions. However, they convey informa-
tion in a piecemeal fashion (different tools for different 
information), leaving users to assimilate and make sense of 
it; and the textual presentation neither supports visual meta-
phors nor integrates with the existing and well-known 
features of the desktop UI.
Non-Experts
In contrast to the wealth of tools available for network and 
security professionals, research in the area of supporting
1046
