CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Sesame: Informing User Security Decisions
with System Visualization
Jennifer Stoll, Craig S Tashman, W. Keith Edwards, Kyle Spafford
Georgia Institute of Technology, School of Interactive Computing
Atlanta, Georgia 30332
jstoll@gatech.edu, {craig, keith, kyle}@cc.gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
Non-expert users face a dilemma when making security 
decisions. Their security often cannot be fully automated 
for them, yet they generally lack both the motivation and 
technical knowledge to make informed security decisions 
on their own. To help users with this dilemma, we present a 
novel security user interface called Sesame. Sesame uses a 
concrete, spatial extension of the desktop metaphor to 
provide users with the security-related, visualized system- 
level information they need to make more informed deci-
sions. It also provides users with actionable controls to 
affect a system&apos;s security state. Sesame graphically facili-
tates users&apos; comprehension in making these decisions, and 
in doing so helps to lower the bar for motivating them to 
participate in the security of their system. In a controlled 
study, users with Sesame were found to make fewer errors 
than a control group which suggests that our novel security 
interface is a viable alternative approach to helping users 
with their dilemma.
Author Keywords: Security usability, security interface 
design, system visualization
ACM Classification: H.5.2 User Interfaces, User-centered 
design; K.6.5 Management of Computing and Information 
Systems: Security and Protection
INTRODUCTION
“AVG Update downloader is trying to access the Internet”
“The firewall has blocked Internet access to your computer 
[FTP] from 192.168.0.105 [TCP Port 57796, Flags: S]”
“[Your] AntiSpyware has detected that the Windows Net- 
BIOS Messenger Service is currently running. (This service 
should not be confused with the peer-to-peer Windows 
Messenger service, or MSN Messenger service which are 
used for Internet Chat). Beginning with Windows XP 
Service Pack 2, the Windows NetBIOS Messenger service...
...What would you like to do?”
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00. 
The above are examples of actual alerts [15] that users are 
given from their anti-virus, anti-spyware and firewall tools. 
While some alerts are purely informational, most require 
users to make a decision. The choices they face are often 
“Always”, “This one time” or “Never,” posing the quandary 
of whether to suffer through even more messages or perform 
an action that may be irreversible. Further, the information 
given to help users make these decisions is often highly 
technical or vague (e.g., “Destination IP: 192.168.0.1: 
DNS” or “This program has changed since the last time it 
ran!”). Even when tools have a “More Info” button to 
provide access to more detailed information, that information 
is often confusing as well.
How do users cope with such security decisions? Some turn 
to online research in an attempt to comprehend the alerts. 
This strategy is evident in the multitude of online forums 
where users ask questions, sharing their collective wisdom 
about such decisions (e.g., antionline.com or fo-
rumz.tomshardware.com). In contrast, some cope by simply 
ignoring pop-ups or warnings from their security tools [20]. 
In fact some security books even advise users to turn off the 
annoying alerts; for example, one self-help security book 
quips, “the [stop alerts] button should say Shut Up, You are 
Driving Me Crazy” [15].
Simply put, users are asked to make decisions about things 
they do not understand, based on information that is difficult 
to comprehend. The poor decision making that (expectedly) 
is an outcome of this can result in dire consequences [18], 
including phishing attacks, bot infestations, and various 
forms of malware
End-user security decisions present a troubling dilemma. On 
the one hand, because users must be involved in deciding 
how to balance security risks against the work they want to 
accomplish, many of these decisions are impossible to 
effectively automate [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] (e.g., as in the case of 
personal firewalls). On the other hand, the users who must 
make these decisions are generally uninterested in security as 
an end in itself [18] and, as noted, often have little useful 
information to help them make good decisions [4, 16]. 
Further, most of these decisions require a level of technical 
knowledge not possessed by most end-users. The key ques-
tion this paper then explores is: since users must make 
security decisions (in particular, ones requiring system-level 
knowledge), how can we help them understand their system 
well enough to make better-informed security choices?
1045
