CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 3: Awareness of new threats reported by
TALC to the test participants.
the Ignore button while viewing a patch website, a Control 
(Ignore) event was written to the log.
Each line on these graphs represents a single test 
participant. Figure 3 records the distribution of Awareness 
events—each representing a newly detected vulnerability— 
over the TALC active week period. The smaller spike in 
awareness at later stages of test period is a composite of 
two factors—new vulnerabilities released by NVD and new 
program installs by users of the software.
Usage Patterns
The majority of user actions were taken within two days 
after graffiti for a particular vulnerability first appeared on 
the desktop: 60% of all vulnerabilities were fixed within a 
two-day period. However, 39% of the remaining 
vulnerabilities that were fixed were patched in the last two 
days of the test, indicating that users were patching, 
ignoring graffiti for a couple of days, and then coming back 
and patching at a later time. This is illustrated in Figure 4 
below.
Recall that Learning events represent visits by users to a 
patch website through TALC; this figure shows the 
distribution of such visits. Beyond simply exploring 
vulnerabilities through TALC, we believe that the effects of 
making users aware of software vulnerabilities on their 
systems may have resulted in greater sensitivity to patching 
in general: A number of the respondents to our post-test 
survey reported using regular web search engines to find 
out more details about the detected vulnerabilities. While 
we were encouraged by these findings, such events are 
beyond the scope of the instrumentation we had in place for 
TALC and so we only have self-reports of such activities.
The Fixed and Ignore types of Control events are a good 
reflection of the effectiveness of TALC. When a participant 
applied a software patch, TALC did not immediately 
remove the graffiti; rather, the graffiti was removed during 
the next periodic scan of the user’s system. The TALC user 
interface, however, provided an option to manually invoke
Figure 4: Learning events logged by TALC.
the scan to remove graffiti for threats that had been fixed. 
Another option, which incidentally most users adopted, was 
to use the Control window to mark a threat as “Fixed” so 
that TALC hides the graffiti. Figure 5 shows users’ usage 
patterns of marking threats as fixed.
A common pattern across all participants is that they tried 
to fix a number of vulnerabilities initially, following which 
there was a lull period with little or no activity; finally, 
several days later, there were more attempts to fix 
vulnerabilities. We believe this pattern indicates favorable 
acceptance on the part of users: rather than becoming 
infuriated with the notifications provided by TALC, users 
were “living with” the notifications for a period of several 
days, and then fixing them at convenient intervals. Users 
were able to put off patching anything for a couple of days, 
but were not allowed to forget about the security task to 
which they needed to attend. This indicates that the graffiti 
notification system worked well in allowing users to push 
back their lower priority (but necessary) security tasks until 
they were convenient, but while still retaining awareness of 
the need to perform these tasks. Furthermore, we believe 
the sudden flurry of activity near the end of the active week
Figure 5: Participants marking threats as “Fixed”.
Awareness
1	2	3	4	5	6	7
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Days
Learning
1	2	3	4	5	6	7
40
20
90
80
70
60
50
30
10
0
Days Graffiti was shown
Control (Fixed)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1	2	3	4	5	6	7
Days Graffiti was shown
1061
