CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
the researcher wants to hear. In our study of active phishing 
indicators we performed a think-alound experiment followed 
by a post-task questionnaire. We then used the C-HIP model 
to analyze our data.
METHODOLOGY
In this study participants made online purchases and then 
were told to check their email, whereupon they encountered 
phishing messages we had sent them. We observed partic-
ipants visit the URLs in these phishing messages, at which 
point the participants were exposed to the web browser warn-
ing messages. We took note of whether participants read 
these warnings and how they chose to proceed. Finally, par-
ticipants were given an exit survey.
The primary purpose of this study was to examine the effec-
tiveness of phishing warnings found in current web browsers. 
These warnings serve as the last line of defense against a user 
divulging his or her sensitive information to a con artist. In 
other words, prior to these warnings being displayed, it is 
likely that users believe they are visiting legitimate websites. 
Thus, we needed users to fall for the phishing messages we 
sent them during our study so that they would be in a similar 
state of mind when they encountered the warnings. At the 
same time, we needed our attack to be plausible. Thus, we 
simulated a spear phishing attack. Spear phishing “involves 
personalized emails or emails sent to a specifically targeted 
group, such as employees of a particular organization” [8]. 
For instance, a phisher might send a message to email ad-
dresses at aol.com announcing account changes impacting 
AOL users. Since all the recipients are AOL users, this scam 
may have increased credibility because users believe it to be 
relevant to them. In our study, if participants did not believe 
our phishing messages to be credible, they would be less 
likely to follow the links and thus would not see the browser 
warning messages.
We framed our study as an “online shopping study”—items 
were purchased online, and then we sent the participants 
phishing messages claiming to be from those shopping web- 
sites. Participants were told that we were examining how 
they interact with shopping websites and that they needed to 
think aloud during their purchases. After the first purchase 
was made, participants checked their email to confirm that 
the order was going to be shipped, thereby encountering the 
first phishing message. Once the participants were confi-
dent that the first purchase had been completed, instructions 
were provided for the second purchase. This purchase was 
then made using a different website, and a different phishing 
message was sent. Participants in the experimental condi-
tions were given an exit survey before leaving. In this sec-
tion we will provide the details of our recruitment process 
and the study design.
Recruitment
This study was designed as a between-subjects study, with 
four different conditions using the Internet Explorer 7.0 and 
Firefox 2.0 web browsers: participants were shown either 
the Firefox warning (Figure 3), the active IE warning (Fig-
ure 1), the passive IE warning (Figure 2), or no warning at 
all. As of June 2007, users of Internet Explorer and Firefox
comprised 58.5% and 34.0% of all Internet users, respec-
tively [18]. Additionally, both browsers have automatic up-
date features. Thus, it is only a matter of time before most 
users will be using the newest versions of these browsers 
which contain these phishing warnings. We began recruiting 
participants in May of 2007.
We did not tell participants that we were studying online se-
curity because we wanted to simulate a natural environment 
by not priming them to security concerns. We recruited par-
ticipants from all over Pittsburgh in order to make our re-
sults generalizable. We attached flyers to telephone posts, 
bus stops, and community bulletin boards. We also posted 
online to Craigslist and a CMU website for recruiting study 
participants. We constructed a screening survey to screen out 
technically savvy individuals, users of certain web browsers, 
participants in previous phishing studies, and users of certain 
email providers. We also used this survey to glean some ba-
sic demographic information from participants, such as age, 
gender, occupation, prior online shopping experience, etc.
Participants who contacted us after seeing a recruitment flyer 
were directed to our online screening survey. Since we were 
examining the newest versions of Firefox (2.0) and IE (7.0) 
to include the active warnings, we made sure that all par-
ticipants in the experimental conditions already used one of 
these browser versions. Thus the screening survey included 
a question about current browser version (with graphics de-
picting how to determine the version) to screen out users of 
other web browsers.
Since our lab has conducted previous studies on phishing, 
we were concerned about the potential for priming of prior 
participants. Thus we disqualified anyone who had previ-
ously participated in a phishing-related study. We were also 
concerned that savvy users would not believe the emails, and 
thus not be exposed to the warnings. We asked four ques-
tions to gauge each participant’s experience:
•	Have you ever designed a website?
•	Have you ever registered a domain name?
•	Have you ever used SSH?
•	Have you ever configured a firewall?
In our pilot we discovered that participants who answered 
yes to all four questions were just as likely to believe the 
phishing emails as all other participants. Thus, we decided 
not to disqualify participants based on these questions.
We tried to make our scenarios as realistic as possible by 
requiring participants to use their own email accounts and 
financial information for the purchases. The screening sur-
vey explicitly asked whether or not they could check their 
email using a web browser on a foreign computer. We also 
asked them to enter their email addresses so that we could 
contact them as well as to determine which email provider 
they were using. We initially found that some of the larger 
free email providers were detecting our phishing messages 
and filtering them out. We minimized this problem by im-
plementing DKIM and SPF on our outgoing mail server to
help recipient mail servers verify the message sender. 1,2
1http://www.dkim.org/ 
2http://www.openspf.org/
1068
