CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Attitudes and Beliefs
We asked participants how their attitudes and beliefs influ-
enced their perceptions and found a highly significant corre-
lation between trusting and obeying the warnings (i.e. users 
who did not trust the warnings were likely to ignore them;
r = 0.76, p &lt; 0.0001). More telling, all but three partic-
ipants who ignored a warning said it was because they did 
not trust the warning. Two of the participants who ignored 
the warnings in the active IE group said they did so because 
they trusted them but thought the warnings were not very se-
vere (“since it gave me the option of still proceeding to the 
website, I figured it couldn’t be that bad”). The other par-
ticipant who trusted the warning yet ignored it was in the 
passive IE group and blamed habituation (“my own PC con-
stantly bombards me with similar messages”). All three of 
these participants questioned the likelihood of the risks, and 
thus were more interested in completing the primary task.
We found a significant correlation between recognizing and
ignoring a warning (r = 0.506, p &lt; 0.0003). This fur-
ther implies that habituation was to blame when participants 
ignored warnings: they confused them with similar look-
ing, but less serious warnings, and thus did not understand 
the level of risk that these warnings were trying to convey. 
This was only a problem for the warnings used by IE, as 
all the Firefox users obeyed the warnings (though only 20% 
claimed to have seen them before, compared to the 50% with 
IE). The IE users who ignored the warnings made comments 
such as:
•	“Oh, I always ignore those”
•	“Looked like warnings I see at work which I know to ig-
nore”
•	“Have seen this warning before and [it] was in all cases 
[a] false positive”
•	“I’ve already seen such warnings pop up for some other 
CMU web pages as well”
•	“I see them daily”
•	“I thought that the warnings were some usual ones dis-
played by IE”
A warning should not require domain knowledge for a user 
to understand it. In order to examine whether prior knowl-
edge of phishing impacted user attitudes towards the warn-
ings, we asked them to define the term “phishing.” Twenty- 
six of the forty-seven participants who noticed the warn-
ings were able to correctly say they had something to do 
with using fraudulent websites to steal personal information. 
We calculated Pearson’s correlation coefficient and found 
a significant correlation between knowing what phishing is
and both reading (r = 0.487, p &lt; 0.0005) and heeding 
(r = 0.406, p &lt; 0.005) the warnings. Thus, if a user does
not understand what phishing is, they are less likely to be 
concerned with the consequences, and thus less likely to pay 
attention to the warning.
Motivation and Warning Behaviors
Table 1 depicts the number of participants from each condi-
tion who fell for at least one phishing message. Some partic-
ipants only clicked on one of the two phishing messages, and 
in other cases some participants only received one phishing 
message due to email filtering.
Overall we found that active phishing warnings were signifi-
cantly more effective than passive warnings (p &lt; 0.0002 for
Fisher’s exact test). We showed the passive Internet Explorer
warning to ten different participants, but only one participant
heeded it and closed the website, whereas the other times
participants dismissed it and submitted personal information
to the phishing websites (in two of these cases participants
failed to notice the warnings altogether). We found that this
passive warning did not perform significantly different than
the control group (p &lt; 1.0 for Fisher’s exact test). The ac-
tive IE warning was ignored by nine participants, while in 
the Firefox condition every participant heeded the warning 
and navigated away from the phishing websites. This was a
highly significant difference (p &lt; 0.0004, for Fisher’s exact
test), however the active IE warning still performed signifi-
cantly better than the control condition (p &lt; 0.01) and the 
passive IE warning (p &lt; 0.044).
Qualitatively, we examined why participants were motivated 
to heed or ignore the warnings. A total of thirty-one partic-
ipants chose to heed the warnings, and in twenty-three of 
these cases participants said that the warnings made them 
think about risks:
•	“I didn’t want to get burned”
•	“...it is not necessary to run the risk of letting other poten-
tially dangerous sites to get my information”
•	“I chose to heed the warning since I don’t like to gamble 
with the little money I have”
•	“I felt it better to be safe than sorry”
•	“I heeded the warning because it seemed less risky than 
ignoring it”
Participants who chose to submit information said that they 
did so because they were unaware of the risks (i.e. they did 
not read the warnings), were used to ignoring similarly de-
signed warnings (i.e. habituation), or they did not under-
stand the choices that the warnings presented.
Environmental Stimuli
In the passive IE condition, three of the participants who ig-
nored the warnings said they did so because they incorrectly 
placed some degree of trust in the phishing website because 
of stimuli other than the warning messages. When asked 
why they chose to ignore the warnings, one participant said 
she had “confidence in the website.” Another participant 
ignored the warning “because I trust the website that I am 
doing the online purchase at.” These answers corroborate 
Fogg’s work, showing that the look and feel of a website 
is often the biggest trust factor [10]. Participants who ig-
nored the active IE warning provided similar answers, and 
also said that they ignored the warnings because they trusted 
the brands that the emails had spoofed.
We also found that when some participants saw the warn-
ings, they examined other security context information be-
fore making a decision. One Firefox user reexamined the 
original phishing email and noticed the lack of any person-
alized information. She then decided to “back out and log 
in from the root domain to check.” After seeing the warn-
ings, ten other Firefox users also examined either the URL 
bar or the email headers. Some observations included: “The
1072
