CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 3. The active Firefox 2.0 phishing warning.
dialog box, is displayed to the user when the browser be-
lieves a website is suspicious (Figure 2), but that website 
has not been verified as being a phishing website (i.e. it does 
not appear on a blacklist). We consider this warning to be 
more passive because it does not give the user any choices, 
nor does it make any recommendations.
Firefox 2.0 also includes an active phishing warning, which 
was part of the Google Toolbar extension for previous ver-
sions of Firefox. When a user encounters a confirmed phish-
ing website, a non-interactive dimmed version of the web- 
site is displayed with an overlayed dialog box. The user is 
given a choice between continuing to the site or leaving. The 
user may also click the red ‘X’ in the corner of the warning, 
which has the same effect as continuing to the website (Fig-
ure 3).
In this study we compared the effectiveness of active and 
passive phishing warnings by analyzing them using a warn-
ing analysis methodology used by researchers in the warning 
sciences field, called the Communication-Human Informa-
tion Processing Model (C-HIP) model [21].
This paper makes three contributions. First, it presents the 
results of a study evaluating the effectiveness of active secu-
rity indicators in current web browsers. Second, it presents 
an analysis of the results using a model from the warning 
sciences. Third, it presents recommendations for improving 
these security indicators such that fewer users fall victim to 
online fraud.
We first frame our study within the context of previous phish-
ing and warning research, and then describe the methodol-
ogy behind our study. We then discuss the results of our 
user study and how effective we determined each warning 
message to be. Finally, we make recommendations based on 
these results for designing more effective security indicators.
BACKGROUND
In this section we describe previous work related to users’ 
susceptibility to phishing, warning indicators used in web 
browsers, and user perceptions of warning messages.
Phishing Susceptibility
Despite growing efforts to educate users and create better 
detection tools, users are still very susceptible to phishing
attacks. Unfortunately, due to the nature of the attacks, it is 
very difficult to estimate the number of people who actually 
fall victim. A 2006 report by Gartner estimated the costs at 
$1,244 per victim, an increase over the $257 they cited in 
a 2004 report [11]. In 2007 Moore and Clayton estimated 
the number of phishing victims by examining web server 
logs. They estimated that 311,449 people fall for phishing 
scams annually, costing around 350 million dollars [15]. An-
other study in 2007 by Florencio and Herley estimated that 
roughly 0.4% of the population falls for phishing attacks an-
nually [9].
Phishing works because users are willing to trust websites 
that appear to be designed well. In a 2001 study on web- 
site credibility, Fogg et al. found that the “look and feel” 
of a website is often most important for gaining a user’s 
trust [10]. A 2006 phishing study by Dhamija et al. found 
that 90% of the participants were fooled by phishing web- 
sites. The researchers concluded that current security indi-
cators (i.e. the lock icon, status bar, and address bar) are inef-
fective because 23% of the participants failed to notice them 
or because they did not understand what they meant [7]. 
In a similar study, Downs et al. showed participants eight 
emails, three of which were phishing. They found that the 
number of participants who expressed suspicion varied for 
each email; 47% expressed suspicion over a phishing mes-
sage from Amazon, whereas 74% expressed suspicion over 
a phishing message from Citibank. Those who had inter-
acted with certain companies in the past were significantly 
more likely to fall for phishing messages claiming to be from 
these companies. Participants were also likely to ignore or 
misunderstand web browser security cues [8].
Phishing Indicators
New research has focused on creating new anti-phishing in-
dicators because existing security indicators have failed. The 
Passpet system, created by Yee et al. in 2006, uses indicators 
so that users know they are at a previously-trusted website. 
Users can store an animal icon within the web browser for 
each trusted site with which they interact. The system will 
only send a password when the user recognizes that the ani-
mal icons match. Preliminary user testing suggests that this 
system is easy for users to use [25]. Other proposals have 
also been put forth to modify browser chrome to help users 
detect phishing websites. In one system, “synchronized ran-
dom dynamic boundaries,” by Ye and Smith, the browser 
chrome is modified to blink at a random rate. If the blink 
rate matches a trusted window’s blink rate, the user knows 
that the window in question has not been spoofed [24]. A 
similar solution using a trusted window was also proposed 
by Dhamija and Tygar in 2005. In their system the chrome 
of the browser window contains a colored pattern that must 
be matched with the trusted window. The user knows to rec-
ognize the trusted window because it contains a personal im-
age that the user selected during the initial configuration [6]. 
Since all of these proposals require the use of complicated 
third-party tools, it’s unclear how many users will actually 
benefit from them. These proposals have only undergone 
minimal user testing in unrealistic environments. User test-
ing should be performed under real world conditions before 
any new security indicator is recommended.
1066
