CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Firefox	20	20	13	4	17	19
Active IE	20	19	10	10	10	12
Passive IE	10	8	3	5	3	5
Table 2. This table depicts the number of participants in each experi-
mental condition, the number who saw at least one warning, the num-
ber who completely read at least one warning, the number who recog-
nized the warnings, the number who correctly understood the warn-
ings, and the number who understood the choices that the warnings 
presented.
This was not the case with the passive warning in IE (Figure 
2). This warning is a single dialog box with only the op-
tion to dismiss it. We observed that it could take up to five 
seconds for this warning to appear. If a user starts typing 
during this period, the user’s keystrokes will inadvertently 
dismiss the warning. Six of the ten participants in this con-
dition never noticed the warning because their focus was on 
either the keyboard or the input box. Two of these partic-
ipants had this happen on both phishing websites, so they 
had no idea they were ever exposed to any warnings. We 
found no statistical significance between this condition and 
the control group. Thus, this type of warning is effectively 
useless.
Effective warnings must also cause attention maintenance— 
they must grab the users’ attention long enough for them to 
attempt comprehension. We examined the number of partici-
pants who read the warnings (as determined by self-reporting 
and confirmed by the observations of the experimenter) in 
order to determine their effectiveness at attention mainte-
nance. Table 2 shows the number of warnings read and the 
number of participants who claimed to have seen the warn-
ings prior to this study, for each experimental condition.
Not counting the two participants who failed to notice the 
warnings entirely, and the participant in the active IE condi-
tion who did not click on the URLs, we found that twenty-six 
of the remaining forty-seven (55%) claimed to have com-
pletely read at least one of the warnings that were displayed. 
When asked, twenty-two of these twenty-six (85%) said they 
decided to read the warning because it appeared to warn 
about some sort of negative consequences.
Upon seeing the warnings, two participants in the active IE 
condition immediately closed the window. They went back 
to the emails and clicked the links, were presented with the 
same warnings, and then closed the windows again. They 
repeated this process four or five times before giving up, 
though never bothered to read the warnings. Both said that 
the websites were not working. Despite not reading or un-
derstanding the warnings, both were protected because the 
warnings “failed safely.” Thus, if users do not read or under-
stand the warnings, the warnings can still be designed such 
that the user is likely to take the recommended action.
Nineteen participants claimed to have previously seen these 
particular warnings. A significantly higher proportion of 
participants in the active IE condition (50%) claimed to have 
recognized the warnings as compared to participants in the
Firefox condition (20%; p &lt; 0.048 for Fisher’s exact test).
Many of the participants who encountered the active IE warn-
ing said that they had previously seen the same warning on 
websites which they trusted, and thus they ignored it. It is 
likely that they did not read this phishing warning because 
IE uses a similar warning when it encounters an expired or 
self-signed SSL certificate. Therefore they did not notice 
that this was a slightly different and more serious warning.
We found a significant negative Pearson correlation between 
participants recognizing a warning message and their will-
ingness to completely read it (r = —0.309, p &lt; 0.03).
This implies that if a warning is recognized, a user is sig-
nificantly less likely to bother to read it completely (i.e. ha-
bituation). Thus, very serious warnings should be designed 
differently than less serious warnings in order to increase the 
likelihood that users will read them. This was also the basis 
for Brustoloni and Villamar´ın-Salom´on’s work on dynamic 
warnings [3].
Warning Comprehension
A well-designed warning must convey a sense of danger and 
present suggested actions. In this study we asked partici-
pants what they believed each warning meant. Twenty-seven 
of the 47 participants (57%) who saw at least one of the 
warnings correctly said they believed that they had some-
thing to do with giving information to fraudulent websites 
(Table 2). Of the 20 participants who did not understand the 
meaning of the warnings, one said that she did not see it long 
enough to have any idea, while the others had widely varying 
answers. Examples include: “someone got my password,” 
“[it] was not very serious like most window[s] warning[s],” 
and “there was a lot of security because the items were cheap 
and because they were international.”
Using Fisher’s exact test, we found that those using Firefox 
understood the meaning of the warnings significantly more
than those exposed to the active IE warnings (p &lt; 0.041) 
and the passive IE warnings (p &lt; 0.005), though we found
no significant difference between the active and passive IE 
warnings. We found a significant Pearson correlation be-
tween completely reading a warning and understanding its
meaning for the active IE warning (r = 0.478, p &lt; 0.039),
but not for Firefox. Since all but one Firefox user correctly 
understood what the warning wanted them to do, this im-
plies that users did not need to completely read it to know 
the appropriate actions to take.
Overall, 31 of the 47 participants who noticed the warnings 
mentioned that they thought they were supposed to leave 
the website or refrain from entering personal information. 
Those who did not understand the warnings provided re-
sponses such as “panic and cancel my accounts,” “confirm 
information about the orders,” and “put in my account infor-
mation so that they could track it and use it for themselves.”
1071
