CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Of the 282 individuals who completed our screening sur-
vey, only 70 qualified and showed up. Despite our efforts 
to screen out individuals who used email providers that were 
likely to filter out our messages, we still found that we could 
not collect data from ten participants because they did not re-
ceive either of our phishing messages. These ten participants 
were not included in our results.
Based on the browser versions that they indicated in the 
screening survey, participants were placed in one of the four 
conditions. The average age of participants was 28 (σ =
10.58), and there was no significant difference between the
groups in terms of age or gender. The Firefox condition con-
sisted of 20 users of Firefox 2.0, while the other two exper-
imental conditions consisted of users of Internet Explorer 
7 (20 participants in the active IE condition and 10 partic-
ipants in the passive IE condition). The ten participants in 
the control group all used an older version of one of the two 
browsers. The control group was used to determine whether 
or not participants were willing to enter information into our 
phishing websites in the absence of any warning messages. 
This told us whether the warning was affecting phishing sus-
ceptibility or if it could be attributed to some other factor. 
The group sizes were chosen based on a power analysis per-
formed prior to recruitment.
We were initially concerned that the self-selected nature of 
the groups (based on web browser preference) may have bi-
ased our study. However, we found no statistical differences 
between the average number of hours participants in each 
group claimed to use the Internet, nor with regard to the av-
erage number of email messages participants claimed to re-
ceive. In each of the active warning groups, exactly seven 
participants answered “no” to all of the questions used to 
gauge technical prowess. Thus, there were equal numbers of 
novices in each group.
Scenarios
We decided to spoof Amazon and eBay since they were the 
most commonly phished non-bank websites [17]. Thus, re-
gardless of familiarity with the real websites, it is likely that 
participants have previously encountered phishing messages 
claiming to be from these websites. Our spoofed websites 
consisted of login forms for usernames and passwords. To 
make these websites look authentic, we registered two do-
main names: ebay-login.net and amazonaccounts.net. The 
websites were designed to mimic the login pages of the orig-
inal websites. We created two spoof URLs at each domain 
name.
We took steps to ensure our phishing websites triggered the 
warnings in each web browser. Firefox downloads its lo-
cally stored blacklist from Google, so we modified it locally 
to include our URLs [16]. Microsoft agreed to add our spoof 
URLs to their remote blacklists, causing those URLs to trig-
ger the IE phishing warnings.
We copied two common phishing emails spoofing Amazon 
and eBay and changed the content to fit our study. The 
message claiming to be from Amazon was sent out in plain 
text and informed the recipient that the order was delayed 
and would be cancelled unless the recipient clicked the in-
cluded URL. The message claiming to be from eBay was in 
HTML and informed the recipient that all international or-
ders needed to be confirmed by visiting a URL contained 
within the message. Both messages contained random or-
der numbers to help convince the recipients of their legit-
imacy, though no information specific to the recipients was 
included in these messages in order to make our attacks real-
istic. The scenario was such that it would have been entirely 
possible for a person to have just completed a purchase from 
one of these websites and then received a generic phishing 
message spoofing that same website. It is also possible for 
a phisher to monitor wireless Internet traffic and conduct a 
similar phishing attack after detecting a purchase. We be-
lieve that the coincidental nature of this attack was the reason 
why many more participants fell for our attacks than what 
has been found in similar studies [8, 7, 19, 14, 20]. Previous 
phishing studies have spoofed companies with whom vic-
tims had relationships. However we are unaware of any user 
studies that have used phishing messages timed to coincide 
with a transaction with the spoofed brand.
Participants arrived at our laboratory and were told that they 
would be purchasing two items online from Amazon and 
eBay. We randomized the order in which the purchases were 
made. We also informed participants that we were recording 
them, so they needed to think aloud about everything they 
were doing. Participants did the study individually with the 
experimenter sitting behind them in the laboratory.
We were concerned that if we allowed participants to pur-
chase whatever they wanted, they might take too long to de-
cide, and that other factors might confound our results. We 
also wanted participants to focus on buying cheap items so 
that we could reimburse them for both purchases while still 
giving them enough additional money for their time. We lim-
ited the scope of the purchases by asking them to purchase a 
box of paper clips from Amazon, which cost roughly $0.50, 
plus around $6 in shipping (the exact prices changed with 
each order since all participants did not purchase the same 
paperclips). We asked participants to make their eBay pur-
chases from a cheap electronics store based in Hong Kong 
that sold a variety of items for around $5-$10, including 
shipping. Participants were compensated $35 for their time 
and the purchases, which were made using their personal 
credit cards.
After each purchase, participants received a sheet of five 
questions relating to shopping. These questions were part 
of an unrelated study on shopping behaviors, but helped our 
study by convincing participants that this was indeed a shop-
ping study. While the participant answered these questions, 
the experimenter sent them a phishing message. We con-
structed a web interface for the study, so that the experi-
menter only needed to enter an email address, the brand to 
spoof, and the experimental condition.
After the written questions were completed, the experimenter 
told the participant to “check your email to make sure that 
the order is confirmed and ready to ship so we can move 
on.” When participants checked their email, they encoun-
tered legitimate messages relating to their orders as well as 
a phishing message. After examining (and reacting) to all of
1069
