CHI 2008 Proceedings · Search	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
normalized over the set of potential targets. More search 
items implies lower initial priors.
Following Ojanpää, Näsänen and Kojo [26] we assumed 
that the information that can be gathered given the 
perceptual span is (1) contingent on the item density, (2) 
contingent on the duration of fixation.
Combining the theories of Cox and Young [8] and Ojanpää, 
Näsänen and Kojo [26] we assume that the visual search 
strategy is rationally adapted to the information that can be 
gained from the perceptual span. On this basis we made 
two predictions:
(1) that packing items together more closely (high density) 
would allow more information to be harvested from the 
perceptual span given sufficient time. We predicate that 
people would therefore increase the duration spent looking 
at any one item, and reduce the number of items directly 
fixated. That is, they would take advantage of the fact that 
more information was available for each fixation.
(2) if there are more search items then the gaze durations 
and the rate of number of items directly fixated in a trial 
should decrease because the prior probability of any one 
item being the target item is decreased [8]. In other words, 
when there are more results returned we expect people to 
give each result less time, presumably reducing the quality 
of each evaluation in order to conduct more evaluations. 
The eye movement strategy should switch to a lower cost 
strategy, involving more item skipping [6].
EXPERIMENT
Method
This study investigates the consequences of expected 
information gain for the visual search strategy that people 
use given pages of thumbnails returned by a search engine. 
Participants were asked to imagine that they were choosing 
where to go on holiday, and that they were using the web to 
gather information about various places that they could visit. 
In particular, their goal was to use a particular image search 
engine site to find an image of a visually attractive 
destination.
Stimuli and Design
There were 180 unique sets of images. Each set included 
image thumbnails about a place, such as a resort, city or 
country. These image thumbnails were selected from the 
search results responding to keywords or search phrases 
input in an image search engine of Flickr, a photo sharing 
website. Moreover, each set at least contains 1,000 photo 
results matching the name of the place. For example, Flickr 
found 423,166 up-to-date results for photos matching 
Florence. We filtered out the tourists’ poor quality self- 
portrait, maps and pictures with special effect, such as High 
Dynamic Range (HDR) images which is not clear in the 
task thumbnail size. Finally, we selected 180 photo 
thumbnails for each set. So, totally, we had unique 32,400 
thumbnails (180 sets × 180 thumbnails). At the eye-to-
Figure 1: an example of search task with high density
layout and one number of pages condition.
Figure 2: A sample trial of low density layout and 5 pages
set size. This shows the thumbnails on page 3.
screen distance of 60 centimeters used in the experiment, 
the size of thumbnails (75 × 75 pixels) subtended a visual 
angle of 2.15°.
The experiment was a within-subjects design and had two 
independent variables. These were thumbnail density and 
number of pages (set size). Density had two levels with 
narrow or wide spacing between items displayed in the 
search task. Figure 1 shows a sample display from one high 
density trial. The edge-to-edge item spacings were 3 pixels 
(visual angle = 0.085°) in high density layout. Figure 2
1077
