CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
concepts, which reified ideas described to us by our study 
participants, helped to elicit discussion of social 
considerations that would shape the appropriation of ICT in 
religious settings. Second, imagining a material object (not 
necessarily a realistic product) that a study participant 
might use to address a particular situation implicitly drew 
out latent practical factors underlying the situation that 
would affect ICT adoption and use. Third, responses to 
sketches of speculative design concepts sometimes led us to 
recognize the need for defamiliarization [6] – to question 
our assumptions about the local context of use. In the 
subsections that follow, we consider the three types of 
outcome in turn, respectively illustrating the interplay of 
design process and fieldwork in developing the themes of 
mindfulness, embeddedness and watchfulness.
Sketching is, of course, a common design practice with a 
large research literature and has long been used to elicit 
feedback from users (see [10] for a general overview). 
Because sketching is low-cost and an efficient way to 
generate multiple ideas, it was a straightforward way to 
“translate” the themes emerging in our data into technology 
concepts. However, sketching is not only a useful tool for 
exploring ideas and eliciting feedback. It can also assist 
designers in their thinking, prompting self-reflection and 
bringing unconscious aspects of experience to conscious 
awareness [33]. Our sketches provided a way for us to
Figure 3. Multimedia capture note-taking system.
Figure 4. Pen-tracking note-taking system.
reflect on our data, one that explicitly used the lens of 
speculative design concepts that reified our understanding 
of the relationship between religion and ICT in Kenyan life.
Over the course of the Kenya fieldwork, we generated and 
used 20 hand-drawn design sketches. In a way analogous 
to keeping fieldnotes or analytic memo-writing, freehand 
sketching during fieldwork helped us to account for and 
describe our observations. It also allowed us to capture 
preliminary ideas that occurred to us or expand upon those 
that were suggested to us during fieldwork. As the 
research progressed, we shared our design sketches with 
groups of students with whom we had established working 
design relationships (see footnote 3) and who were 
knowledgeable about both design (including sketching 
practice) and life in Kenya. All of the sketches were shown 
and the students were asked to provide critiques – comment 
on them, pick a favorite and explain their choice, and so on. 
The discussions below reflect not only our thoughts about 
and responses to the design concepts but theirs as well.
Concepts for mindfulness:
Religion and the appropriation of mundane technology 
Participants expressed an overwhelming desire to stay 
mindful of their faith by integrating it into their daily lives 
during our interviews. This suggested a range of design 
possibilities. For instance, in the same way that material 
artifacts (plaques, sticky notes on refrigerators, and 
notebooks filled with prayer lists) could facilitate 
individuals’ mindfulness of their faith, so might 
computational artifacts. The design questions for us were, 
“Are there issues so specific to the religious use case that 
entirely new systems would be required?” and “Can current 
technology be extended in relatively straightforward ways 
that would make them suitable for religious appropriation?”
As previously mentioned, note-taking was described 
repeatedly in the U.S. and Kenya as a way to stay focused 
in church services, thus helping participants stay mindful of 
the message throughout the week. In response to this we 
produced a number of sketches for electronic note-taking 
systems to be used in church and other places. Given the 
prevalence of mobile phones in Kenya and other emerging 
markets, most of our concepts centered on incorporating 
capture and access features into mobile phones.
Naturally, one series of concepts drew on the substantial 
HCI literature on systems to support note-taking in the 
office and classroom. For example, some concepts (Figure 
3) extend a long line of paper-based physical/virtual note- 
taking interfaces found in the CHI literature (e.g., [34]). 
Some concepts imagined “smart paper” solutions similar to 
Paper++ [22], whereas others (Figure 4) were based on new 
ultrasonic pen-trackers that do not require instrumented 
notebooks or special paper. Figure 4, in particular, was 
imagined as a straightforward extension of existing 
practices and context. Unlike the U.S., where PCs, the 
Internet, and photocopiers are widely available and 
commonly used to disseminate information, Kenyans
17
