CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
frequently rely on copying information by hand. It thus 
seemed practical to imagine alternative ways for them to 
disseminate written information (i.e., via the mobile phone).
However, we received ambivalent feedback from the 
students about design concepts in which technology was 
clearly visible. On one hand, they were interested in a 
system that would help them archive and share their notes; 
on the other hand they questioned our designs. In part, this 
was due to questions regarding the appropriateness of 
visibly operating “computer”-like technology in a church 
sanctuary. Despite aggressive adoption of technology in 
megachurches in the U.S., there remain understood norms 
about behavior in churches that differ from office and 
classroom environments. The most prominent norm is that 
church is a place of worship, not work. Indeed, reverence 
to a higher power is the priority, unlike office settings 
where efficiency and productivity tend to be more valued. 
These differences must be considered when developing a 
note-taking system for church where the presence of laptops 
is questionable as well as potentially distracting. Potential 
note-taking applications must strive to preserve “inner 
stillness” that accompanies mindfulness towards God.
It does seem like one could, for the most part, provide 
generic technology for these purposes and that it would 
even be useful for more general (at least currently) practices 
like “hand copying.” The design challenge is to make it 
acceptable to use ICT in sensitive situations, in which case 
something like the pen-tracker (which looks like a regular 
pad of paper) may be more acceptable than something that 
is obviously a mobile phone. Finally, considerations would 
have to be made so it preserves, rather than distracts 
reverence during church worship.
Concepts for embeddedness:
Drawing out latent factors
While considering designs to help household members 
maintain their embeddedness in multiple social and spatial 
contexts, we drew on a rich variety of projects on 
“connecting homes” that range from early work on 
Casablanca [16] to recent work on HomeNote [32]. From a 
technical perspective, the design space is well-explored and 
it is easy to come up with concepts. However, in the course 
of doing so, many latent issues come to the fore. For 
example, issues pertaining to families’ communication 
habits surfaced during conversations around Figure 6.
One concept that resulted in positive feedback from the 
students arose from casual observations about home décor. 
During our home visits we were struck by the consistency 
of the “calendar aesthetic” – homes typically had several 
calendars hanging on the living room walls and out-of-date 
calendars often remained hanging (Figure 5). When we 
asked study participants about this, we were typically told 
that many people enjoyed the photographic imagery and 
that access to promotional corporate calendars was widely 
coveted. This quickly inspired the concept of an 
inexpensive, SMS-enabled calendar device with just
Figure 6. SMS-enabled family calendar.
enough intelligence to enter and display a small bit of text 
(i.e., a reference to a daily Bible verse) as well (Figure 6). 
As a calendar, the device would be highly visible, and (as 
with minimally intimate objects [19]) verses could be 
appropriated to communicate either purely phatic signals or 
rich and allusive messages depending on shared context.
In discussions with the students around rural-urban 
communication, design factors we had not fully considered 
became apparent. As mentioned earlier, the pace of life in 
cities differs between the rural settings, thus making finding 
times to talk challenging. Also, individuals living in rural 
setting generally have less disposable income than those in 
the city, making them far less likely to make voice calls or 
return missed calls. Finally, power and mobile connectivity 
can be relatively spotty in rural areas, privileging SMS over 
voice and simple devices over powerful ones. Hence, the 
appeal of the idea lay not only in its aesthetic but in its 
pragmatics.
Concepts for watchfulness:
An encounter with defamiliarization
Our findings suggest that Americans (unlike Kenyans) 
often turned to technology to control their access to media 
content. In addition to the software application described 
by our participant there are a variety of other technologies 
designed to monitor media consumption in the U.S., 
including the “V-chip” for television and Net Nanny 71A for 
the Internet. We naively assumed that a similar approach 
would address the desire of Kenyan parents to ensure that 
their children do not consume inappropriate media. For 
example, we imagined a system that allowed a parent to 
preview media before it was made accessible to children 
and decide whether it could be played for the household
Figure 5. The Kenyan calendar aesthetic .
18
