CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
especially vocal about instilling the appropriate values in 
their children so they could make their own decisions 
regarding the programs they watched. This quote from a 
mother of two reflected what other Kenyans said:
When things like wrestling come on [the children] know to 
switch-off and monitor themselves, they switch off by 
themselves because we have taught them this thing is not 
right. They will not watch – when people start showing their 
ways of pornography, they will switch off the TV. They know 
that.
– Nairobi churchgoer
In conclusion, what we want to stress here is that 
irrespective of whether the content was secular or religious, 
faith impacted all of our participants’ interactions with 
media. In other words, faith-based decisions play a role in 
determining whether, and if so how, some people will 
decide to appropriate media and content.
Embeddedness
Rural-urban migration is a general phenomenon in 
developing regions [35], and though all of our participants 
lived in and around Nairobi, many alluded to “the village” 
(i.e., the rural or peri-urban location where they grew up). 
There was a desire to remain embedded in a larger social 
structure, i.e., to retain extensive ties with family and 
community members living in rural Kenya. ICT facilitated 
these ties. Notably, because the landline telephone 
infrastructure is sparse, recent improvements in mobile 
phone cost and coverage have greatly simplified 
communication with family living in the village. A 
recently-deployed money transfer system based on text 
messaging, M-Pesa, has also simplified the process of 
remitting money to distant relatives.
This is not to say that mobile phones have been a panacea. 
One participant noted that one must still sometimes 
schedule a time to call those living in rural areas because 
his extended family members must find a location with 
adequate coverage. More importantly, participants noted 
the difference in their pace of life in the city as opposed to 
the village. Indeed, many professionals talked about how 
the faster pace of life in the city left them with less time to 
engage in faith building activities and to stay connected 
with family members.
So if someone doesn’t understand that – so my mother says, 
“You never call nowadays.” But it’s not that you don’t want to 
call, it’s only that everyday you are rushing. You have to 
make money, big traffic jam, leaving the office to be together. 
You have to run from office to class, from class to the house, 
from the house, you know, you are tired, you sleep.
– Nairobi churchgoer
It may not be clear why rural-urban connections should 
matter any more in Kenya than they do in any other migrant 
population, especially since rural-urban migration is so 
frequently described in terms of urban opportunity (e.g., 
“The choice, for many, is going hungry in the countryside 
or finding a job while living in squalor in [Nairobi]” [3]).
However, in Kenya as elsewhere in Africa [35], migrant 
households are often multi-spatial [13]; for those whose 
urban positions are less secure, the family will maintain 
both rural and urban dwellings to maximize its collective 
economic diversity. Even middle-class Kenyans often 
described Nairobi as a temporary place to live and reported 
plans to return (eventually) to their places of origin.
Of relevance here is that this multi-spatiality has a strong 
cultural element, sometimes called home2 [27], that is based 
in part on elements of traditional religion that have been 
retained in social practice [24]. Tribal and other kinship- 
based connections are still important:
[Maintaining] relationships in African countries is really 
powerful. It’s an integral part of who we are. It’s an integral 
part of our identity. You have relationships with your mother 
and your father and all your siblings and your extended 
family, your uncles, your aunties as if they are part of you...
– Nairobi churchgoer
The ICT use just discussed, then, is not simply a way to 
“stay in touch with friends and family” or a means of 
facilitating economic exchange, but rather takes on 
significance as a means of managing multi-spatial activities 
and relationships that are difficult to “isolate” from 
religious identity and practice.
We are not suggesting that maintaining this embedded 
relationship is inherently less important in the U.S. 
However, there are many more means for families to 
connect in the U.S. (including reliable postal and telephone 
systems) that are far less widely available in Kenya’s rural 
regions. Instead, we want to suggest that, given the role of 
family and community in Kenyan culture, the disconnect 
created by rural-urban migration should be considered in 
ICT development, and that religion is a central component 
of understanding the motivation for wanting these ties.
DISCUSSION: SKETCHING, DESIGN, AND ANALYSIS 
In this section, we turn to our study’s design thread and to 
the paper’s methodological contribution. In conjunction 
with the Kenya fieldwork2 just described, we undertook a 
series of design exercises3 to help frame our findings in 
material terms; we focus here on the production of, and 
interaction around, sketches of speculative design concepts 
[12]. The goal was not “need-finding” but rather to gain 
further insight into the interaction of popular religion and 
the appropriation of ICT. Three main types of outcome 
from these exercises informed the themes emerging from 
the fieldwork. First, the sketching of speculative design
2 Given our broader interest in design for developing regions we focused 
our efforts on concepts grounded in findings from our Kenya fieldwork. 
In the future we will do the same with our U.S. data.
3 During our study, we organized several design engagements with groups 
of Nairobi university students – design students at the University of 
Nairobi and computer science students at Jomo Kenyatta University of 
Agriculture and Technology. Aside from interaction around sketches as 
described here, exercises included a design charrette (collaborative 
studio exercise) and a collection of multi-week iterative design projects.
16
