CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
features can either work for or against a system’s appeal 
and usability. Furthermore, designers’ understanding of 
users’ worldviews affects the degree to which users can 
meaningfully participate in the design process.
In this paper, we report on design-oriented research 
conducted over a six-month period in urban centers in the 
U.S. and Kenya. We begin by discussing previous research 
on religion and ICT, followed by a description of our field 
sites, methods, and participants. We then turn to our 
empirical contribution, a discussion of three themes 
developed in our fieldwork – mindfulness, watchfulness, 
and embeddedness – that highlights how secular and 
religious aspects of life are intertwined, particularly in 
Kenya. We then turn to a design contribution, illustrating 
how sketches of speculative ICT designs can be used to 
extend fieldwork by surfacing more data about the 
relationship between technology and religion.
BACKGROUND: TECHNOLOGY AND RELIGION
Scholars in anthropology and sociology frequently discuss 
religion, yet it is a topic with which ICT designers rarely 
engage directly. This is surprising given its importance to 
billions of people worldwide. Like Bell [5], we speculate 
that this lack of engagement may be due to an assumption 
that technology and religion must live in constant tension, 
each precluding a complete fulfillment of the other. 
Recently, however, religion has arisen more frequently in 
discussions of “international” design (e.g., [23]) and more 
broadly in HCI and CSCW discourse (e.g., [26]. Within 
these communities’ scope of concern, we can identify three 
main threads of work:
Online spirituality. Perhaps the most widely known of the 
three threads, this focuses on the impact of virtuality and 
mediated communication on spiritual life. Studies in this 
genre typically focus on religious practice in online 
community settings [9,30]. A common finding in such 
studies is that of leveling, a flattening of organizational 
hierarchies that in turn raises questions about control [20]. 
These studies also point to the widespread use of 
technologies by laity, e.g., participating in computer- 
mediated prayer, searching for places to attend services, and 
learning about one’s faith [9,30].
Design exercises. Other designers and researchers have 
explored how religious practices can motivate novel design 
ideas. Broadly, these explorations fall into three categories. 
First, there are applications of user-centered design 
techniques to religious tasks. Examples from the HCI 
literature include AltarNation, a system that allows 
physically-isolated individuals to pray and meditate with 
others [17], and Gospel Spectrum, an interactive Bible 
visualization tool [11]. Examples of products include the 
Ilkone i800 Islamic mobile phone [1] and the eQuran e- 
book reader [2]. Second, there are techno-aesthetic 
explorations, such as Soner Ozenc’s illuminated prayer rug 
that glows more brightly as it is turned towards Mecca [1]. 
Third, design has been used to critique and comment on the
intersection of religion and material culture. An example of 
this is the iBelieve [1], a plastic cap that turns an iPod 
music player into a crucifix.
Studies of technological appropriation. Most recently, HCI 
researchers have begun to examine appropriation of 
technology in different religious communities. Wyche et 
al. [39] studied ministers in Protestant Christian churches in 
the Southeastern U.S. Motivated by reports of increasing 
technology use within Protestant Christian ministry 
(particularly in megachurches), their study highlighted how 
pastors use technologies to support administrative and 
spiritual practices. Woodruff et al. [38] studied Orthodox 
Jewish families who employed home automation 
technology to facilitate observation of the Sabbath. Thus 
far, design praxis has been addressed only in the form of 
general design implications.
We build on these threads of prior research and share a 
focus on personal and social religious practice. However, 
we have the additional goals of understanding how practice 
spans the secular-religious divide (particularly in 
developing regions) and illustrating how to bring design 
research into the fieldwork process.
STUDY: SITES, METHODS AND PARTICIPANTS
Site Selection
Our field sites, Nairobi and Atlanta, are urban centers with 
a number of relevant similarities and connections. Both are 
regional commercial centers (Atlanta within the 
Southeastern U.S., Nairobi within eastern Sub-Saharan 
Africa) and have comparable metropolitan populations. 
They are also centers of intense Christian organizational 
activity, with churches always forming, growing, and 
failing. Finally, Atlanta is home to a large Kenyan migrant 
community that facilitated participant recruiting in Nairobi.
Our work in Atlanta is an extension of our prior research on 
ICT use in megachurches [39,40]. Megachurches are noted 
as aggressive adopters of ICT. While only a few percent of 
the U.S. population worships at a true megachurch with 
2000+ attendees, the trends they shape extend throughout a 
highly-concentrated religious landscape (45% of U.S. 
Protestants worship at the largest 10% of churches [37]). 
The prior Atlanta research provides a foundation for 
thinking about ICT use among Christian laity (i.e., those 
members of the congregation who are not part of the 
religious organization) and, combined with the new 
fieldwork, serves as context for comparative research.
Our main interest in Nairobi as a site was not, however, its 
linkage to Atlanta, but the way in which Kenya represents a 
kind of “developing world” Christianity. First, as Table 1 
suggests, Christianity (and particularly renewalist 
Christianity) has a remarkable strength and pervasive 
presence in Kenyan public life. The term renewalist refers 
to Charismatic and Pentecostal Christians, who can be 
broadly distinguished from the evangelical Christians we 
studied in Atlanta in terms of affiliation and practices. For
12
