CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 7. Remote parental media control.
Figure 8. SMS media recommender system.
members (Figure 7). Similarly, we imagined a system in 
which communities of users sent text messages to rate a 
program in terms of its moral appropriateness (Figure 8) in 
much the same way that online rating and reputation 
systems work on the Internet.
While we did not show these design sketches to study 
participants, we discussed the associated concepts with 
some of them during interviews. The response from these 
participants clearly indicated that case-by-case control was 
not desired. Instead, they stated that they wanted ways to 
instill the right values of parental respect and sexual 
morality into their children and friends so that they could 
trust them not to watch “bad” shows. Rather than relying 
on technology, parents wanted children to apply their 
personal judgment and monitor their own behavior.
Bell and others argues that the challenge for researchers and 
designers is to see beyond the naturalizing of devices and 
experiences to their cultural roots [6]. By “naturalize,” she 
refers to individual’s ideas about cultural phenomena that 
are rooted in their personal experiences. Our engagement 
with Kenyan Christians suggests that defamiliarization can 
also be useful in forcing designers to see their Western- 
centric assumptions about technology use and adoption in a 
new light and prompt designers to consider a wider range of 
options.
Given recent increased interest in producing technology for 
developing regions, we believe that incorporating 
“defamiliarizing exercises” (such as presenting concept
drawings to potential users) can be useful in prompting 
designers to question unwittingly projection of Western 
assumptions about technology adoption and use onto users 
in developing regions.
CONCLUSION
In this paper we presented findings from a six-month 
design-oriented project examining the adoption and use of 
technology for religious purposes. In addition to adding to 
the growing number of design and empirical studies 
examining issues surrounding design of technology for 
developing regions and religious uses of technology, we 
make the additional contributions.
First, we present empirical findings grounded in our 
fieldwork. These illustrate the weak distinction between 
using technology for religious and secular purposes and that 
indeed, understanding how ICT are appropriated for 
religious purposes leads to broader design implications.
Second, we make a methodological contribution by 
describing how we used design sketches to reify our 
cultural and technical assumptions. By integrating design 
sketching early in our research process we were able to 
engage more deeply with the themes emerging from our 
fieldwork and unpack the Western assumptions embedded 
in our work. We suggest that design sketching and the 
dialogic engagement it promotes with users can be a device 
for defamiliarization. We believe integrating techniques 
that allow designers to better engage with users’ needs will 
become more critical as HCI developers focus on 
technology for developing regions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to our participants and our design 
collaborators for sharing their stories and creative thoughts. 
This research was supported in part by a grant from the 
Intel Research Council.
REFERENCES
1. Design and Religion: New Forms of Faith (special 
issue),” I.D. Magazine, March/April, 2006.
2. “Intel partners with Saudi firms to develop electronic 
Quran,” AP Financial Wire, Dec. 19, 2006.
3. “Kenya: Going Up or Down?” The Economist, June 9, 
2007, 59.
4. Barrett, D.B., Kurian, G.T. and Johnson, T.M., World 
Christian Encyclopedia: A Comparative Survey of 
Churches and Religions in the Modern World. OUP, 
Oxford, 2001.
5. Bell, G., “No More SMS from Jesus: Ubicomp, 
Religion and Techno-spiritual Practices,” Proc. 
Ubicomp 2006, Springer (2006), 141-158.
6. Bell, G., Blythe, M. and Sengers, P., “Making by 
Making Strange: Defamiliarization and the Design of 
Domestic Technologies,” ACM TOCHI 12, 2 (2005), 
149-173.
7. Berger, P.L., “The Desecularization of the World: A 
Global Overview,” in The Desecularization of the
19
