CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
became apparent when we compared the results of our 
research between the two groups.
It was the differences that emerged during analysis that 
were the impetus for sketching design ideas (which we 
describe later in the paper). The sketched technology 
concepts are examples of developing technology grounded 
in daily life, with an emphasis on understanding faith’s role 
in it. Thus, they demonstrate how ICT can be designed for 
both instrumental and religious purposes.
In the remainder of this section, we introduce three themes 
that represent some ways in which people made decisions 
about adoption and use of ICT based on religious criteria: 
mindfulness, watchfulness, and embeddedness. These 
themes are by no means intended to be an exhaustive 
taxonomy of Atlanta or Nairobi life or even of our data. 
However, they do represent a clustering of some specific 
design-relevant aspects of Christian life that emerged from 
our fieldwork.
Mindfulness of faith
During our interviews, we asked how faith influences 
participants’ lives. All of our participants in Atlanta and 
Nairobi talked about continuing to grow and learn about the 
teachings in the Bible and coupled that to wanting to be 
mindful of their faith throughout the day. Mindfulness, or a 
person becoming aware of their thoughts and actions in the 
present moment, is an important element in many religious 
faiths [21]. When asked if they used technology to stay 
focused on their faith, participants answered with stories 
about using computers, software, and mobile phones to do 
so. They also discussed a broader range of technologies – 
such as pen and paper notes – and the role played by these 
technologies in focusing them on their Christian faith.
Individuals in Atlanta and Nairobi both articulated how ICT 
was interwoven with mindfulness. For example, some used 
email or mobile text messaging (SMS) services to receive 
daily Bible-based devotionals. Others described how 
scheduling software helped them structure their days 
around faith-related activities (e.g., morning prayers, Bible 
study, and attending church on Sundays).
Another widespread practice was using technology to send 
and receive prayer requests – solicitations to and from 
others to pray. Kenyans were more likely to use SMS for 
this, whereas Americans would rely on email or check their 
church’s website (many posted weekly lists of parishioners 
in need of prayer online). Both Atlanta and Nairobi 
participants spoke of the centrality of prayer to their faith; it 
directly reminded them of God’s impact in peoples’ lives, 
including their own, particularly during times of crisis. The 
following represents many participants’ thoughts about 
mindfulness and prayer:
One thing that I found very – very helpful to our lives as a 
family and to me as a person is the issue of prayer. I’ve 
prayed for things and I’ve seen them come true. You have a
problem and you don’t know how to solve it. But I find that 
when I pray I find a solution.
– Nairobi churchgoer
One of the most striking consistencies found among our 
participants was the desire to recall their Sunday worship 
experience during the following week. Parishioners in 
Atlanta and Nairobi were particularly interested in 
remembering key phrases of sermons that resonated with 
them so that they could apply it to life situations away from 
the church. This is how one Atlanta Christian described it:
...I mean, I’m learning so much, I mean, it’s something that 
you can go through at home, you know, try to remind yourself 
because it’s easy to get it when you’re there but it’s not easy to 
actively keep it in your memory and to keep applying it.
– Atlanta churchgoer
Note-taking was a strategy employed by more than half our 
participants to help them “actively keep” what was heard on 
Sunday in their memories (Figure 1). Participants talked 
about note-taking in interviews and during church services 
we consistently observed parishioners balancing spiral- 
bound notebooks and Bibles on their laps, attentively 
listening to what was being said and jotting it down. When 
we toured participants’ homes, most showed us stacks of 
notebooks and binders filled with notes from services. 
They took notes because it focused them on what was being 
taught in church and insured what was said on Sunday 
“stuck with them” throughout the week.
They always remind me. You know, like I said, “Out of sight, 
out of mind?” I write things in notebooks and I look through 
them from time to time. So at least I’ll remember what was 
being said. And a lot of things I just integrate into my daily 
life.
– Atlanta churchgoer
You can see these [notebooks] are for personal study. This is 
where I have taken from the church; you can see a 
continuation from this service. I normally write the day, like 
this. I write the days, also the person preaching.
– Nairobi churchgoer
Though the practice of taking notes during services was 
consistent, there were differences between Nairobi and 
Atlanta participants that can be attributed to differences in 
availability of Internet access. In many cases, Atlanta 
participants used the Internet to supplement their note- 
taking activities. Their churches had websites that offered
Figure 1. Participant notebooks in Nairobi and Atlanta.
14
