CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
outlines, slide presentations, and videos of the sermons that 
parishioners can watch at their convenience.
I use a lot of... recently I’ve been going online to different 
gateway Bible-study places and pulling down Bible studies off 
of there. And then just sometimes instead of writing in a 
journal, I’ll type them up on a computer, save them in a file.
– Atlanta churchgoer
Indeed, all Atlanta participants had Internet access at home 
and reported relying on it to help them “grow in their faith.” 
Examples included watching sermons online, praying with 
family using voice over IP (VoIP) services, and looking up 
Bible verses. In contrast, none of our Nairobi participants 
reported having Internet access at home. Reasons for this 
included high service cost, poor connectivity, and lack of 
personal computers. With fewer supplemental resources 
available, it was important to be more thorough about 
capturing elements of the services in notes while at church.
Whether it was using a sticky note to remind them of a 
friend in need of prayer, reading daily devotionals online, 
or studying a ledger filled with notes, it was clear that 
participants used technologies that have typically been 
associated with secular practice for more than strictly 
instrumental purposes. Interactions with these artifacts 
reminded them that their daily activities were guided by 
something larger than themselves – their Christian faith.
Watchfulness
Many aspects of Kenyan society appear to be strongly 
oriented towards community norms. Consider security. In 
the middle-class homes we visited, security measures in the 
form of private watchmen, gates, walls and reinforced doors 
were universal; this is not surprising given the extreme 
economic inequality in Nairobi. However, what did 
surprise us was how the security measures seemed to 
operate. Private watchmen were unarmed; alarms were 
rarely evident; walls seemed surmountable with effort. 
This in spite of the fact that most, if not all, middle-class 
developments are adjacent to a shantytown. For example, 
in Figure 2, the vast slum of Kibera is just over a low wall 
from one of our participant’s house. Clearly, it is not the 
physical security measures themselves that are deterring 
crime as much as the social controls they represent [14], 
particularly in the form of the unarmed watchmen.
We saw a similar kind of watchfulness seemingly being 
applied to the consumption of media. During tours of 
participants’ homes we asked them to talk about their 
computers, radios, media players (e.g., DVD or VCR) and 
televisions. Family members in seven of the Nairobi homes 
showed us collections of African gospel CDs and Christian 
videos and spoke of keeping their TVs tuned to the news 
and “Family TV” – the country’s lone Christian-oriented 
channel. Our Atlanta participants also showed us media 
collections, but these were more likely to be predominately 
secular rather than religious in content. Given the increased 
access to media content facilitated by Internet access at 
home, our Atlanta participants were more concerned with
avoiding online sites that reported erroneous information 
about their faith or displayed content that opposed their 
values. Whether through the TV or computer, it was 
common for participants in both Atlanta and Nairobi to note 
that secular media contradicted key tenets of their faith and 
that they worked to avoid it.
I just stopped listening to anything else. I just got so tired of 
the, you know, the references to sexuality and stuff like that, 
that I just did not believe in, that I just started listening to 
Christian all the time. And they have a lot of the Christian 
music that I hear on the radio in the contemporary worship.
– Atlanta churchgoer
It means at some point or another you’re going to have to, 
like, evaluate yourself and come to some major decisions. Are 
you following God or are you not following God? Are you 
obeying God or are you disobeying God? You’ll have to make 
those decisions sooner or later when you listen to the station, 
you know. With secular stations you don’t have to make that 
choice. You can just hide in your own cocoon.
– Nairobi churchgoer
Despite this broadly shared characteristic, we found 
differences in how U.S. and Kenyan participants wanted to 
monitor access to media. Like security, Kenyans were 
interested in relying on social controls for enforcement, 
whereas Americans often used physical or technological 
controls. For example, a U.S. college-aged Christian male 
described downloading a program that monitored his 
Internet usage:
There’s one thing. It’s called the XXX Church. And they 
have this accountability kind of stuff. They have this piece of 
software that you download that pretty much keeps track of 
what websites you look at. And if there are any questionable 
kind of ones, because that is something I’ve struggled with.
– Atlanta churchgoer
In contrast, rather than using technology, Kenyans 
monitored media consumption themselves, and were
Figure 2. Security in estate adjacent to Vibera.
15
