CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
policy that turns to this type of language is the Copyrights 
policy.
•	It uses very insistent language (“Editors must take 
particular care...”, “...must adhere strictly to...” 
(emphasis in original), or “We must get the article right” 
(emphasis in original)).
•	In internal discussions, explanations for the policy and
changes to the policy are described in the third person 
(they, them, he, her) not first person (we, us, I, me).
•	External attention triggers changes to the policy and
concerns of the external stakeholders are one of the 
factors referenced in discussions of the policy, such as a 
comment on the Biographies of living person page 
stating, “I started this due to the Daniel Brandt situation.”
•	The policy is referenced in statements to external
stakeholders and media.
While the Biography of living persons policy is an extreme 
case, which came about because of a very high level of 
external attention to a particular aspect of Wikipedia, other 
examples do exist, such as the sock-puppeting of external 
organizations that edit the content of the entries on them or 
the revelations that editors were not as qualified as they 
claimed.
Implications for External Signals
External signals serve the role of demonstrating that the 
wiki and its members recognize an issue as important or 
significant. However, doing this too often can weaken the 
impact or message that an external signal sends to the 
external audience. It is important to note that rules which 
act as external signals speak to external audiences and are 
not necessarily meant for internal audiences, or members. 
Theoretically, a rule which serves only as an external signal 
could be removes and not change the internal dynamic of 
the community.
Rules and Policies as Internal Signals
Policies and rules can be used to signal to the community 
what the community finds important, such as creating a 
policy about a particular issue or behavior which is 
significant to the community.
Internal Signals in Wikipedia
An example of a policy developed as an internal signal is 
the Civility policy. Its function is to promote polite 
interactions between members of the community, rather 
than to recognize or call significance to an issue for an 
external audience. Perhaps as a result of its role, this 
policy’s current form differs from its original form the least 
of all the policies and generates the fewest discussions or 
dissensions. Policies fitting into this category are not 
threatened by outside forces, so their language can remain 
less formal in contrast to rules acting as external signals. As 
such, they also will not serve as the foci of editorial 
pressures faced by those responding to external signals.
This policy also acts as an internal signal via its prominent 
placement on the list of policies for first-time users [48].
Implications for Internal Signals
Internal signals demonstrate values and identity to internal 
stakeholders. It is significant to note that while internal 
signals speak to the internal stakeholders, they can be 
triggered by either internal members (e.g. via complaints or 
problematic events) or external viewers.
Rules and Policies as Negotiated Settlements and 
Trophies
People have different interests or perspectives. Rules and 
policies are negotiated settlements or trophies. Settlements 
are creating to avoid the cost of continued conflict, while 
trophies are created to give credibility and influence to the 
“winner” in future discussions.
Negotiated Settlements and Trophies in Wikipedia
In Wikipedia, references to “that has already been decided” 
or references to policy changes as having been determined 
in one side’s favor or another reflect this perspective. An 
example of this “trophy” type situation occurs in the 
Consensus policy. As mentioned previously, extensive
Figure 3. Wikipedia consensus flowchart
1106
