CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
are exceptional, for they can largely be applied only by 
administrators, by those with power acceded to them by the 
group through their demonstrated degree of participation in 
editing and through the acknowledgement of those efforts 
by the other power holders and wielders in the system.
IMPLICATIONS FOR CREATION OF WIKI-BASED 
SYSTEMS AND DESIGN OF PLATFORMS
We suggest, therefore, that pursuing the “policyless” ideal 
that wikis represent is a pipedream. Policy creation and 
maintenance is an important aspect of the work that must be 
done to keep the community running
Providing tools and infrastructure mechanisms that support 
the development and management of policies is an 
important part of creating social computing systems that 
work. For example, work has been done on policy 
extraction that focuses on identifying rules which can be 
embedded in the infrastructure to support coordination and 
organization. This study suggests that policies vary in their 
intention to support coordination and organization, thus the 
application of the work on policy extraction is narrowed. 
For example, a rule acting as an external signal has less 
intention for coordination and organization. As a result, it 
may not be appropriate for it to be embedded in the 
infrastructure to support coordination and organization. 
Looking at the language used in writing the policy may 
signal its intention to support coordination and organization 
and, subsequently, whether it is a candidate for embedding 
in the infrastructure. More detailed systematic studies can 
provide insight into a policies candidacy for embedding in 
the infrastructure.
While there is something to be said about treating policies 
as coordination mechanisms that are automated or at least 
embedded directly in the technology, that approach is not 
without its pitfalls. Since policies can also be highly 
symbolic or meaning-filled, embedding them or automating 
them may not work because it could remove this function or 
make it less effective for this purpose. Furthermore, it may 
be possible that different rules playing different roles have 
varying importance for the success of the wiki at specific 
phases in the wiki lifecycle.
This work raises important questions for organizations 
implementing wikis and collaborative technologies for 
internal use. When organizations invest in these 
technologies, such as Lotus Notes and Microsoft 
Sharepoint, their first step is often to put in place a 
collection of policies and guidelines regarding their use. 
However, less attention is given to the policies and 
guidelines created by the groups that use these systems – 
which are often left to “emerge” spontaneously. The 
examples and concepts described in this paper highlight the 
complexity of rule formation and suggest that support 
should be provided to help collaborating groups create and 
maintain effective rulespaces.
Lastly, the Wikipedia archives suggest that facilitating, 
supporting, and managing this system of rules may not be
simply a matter of data collection. Rather, serving this 
system well is a matter of promoting situational awareness 
and strategic intervention in a complex, evolving system.
CONCLUSIONS
Wikis have captured the imagination of many because as a 
technology they support unencumbered, highly flexible, 
very visible, and accessible collaboration [5, 11, 22, 42, 52, 
53]. These features have led many commentators and 
authors to wax eloquently about the possibility of new types 
of work and organization which are peer-based, non-
hierarchical, non-bureaucratic, emergent, complex, and 
communal.
While it may be the case that wikis do in fact provide a 
basis for this type of work arrangement, the study reported 
here suggests that the true power of wikis lies in the fact 
that they are a platform that provides affordances which 
allow for a wide variety of rich, multifaceted organizational 
structures. Rather than assuming that rules, policies, and 
guidelines are operating in only one fashion, wikis allow 
for, and in fact facilitate, the creation of policies and 
procedures that serve a wide variety of functions – and as a 
result they are capable of truly supporting a much broader 
range of structures and activities than many of the other 
more structured, collaborative platforms.
This suggests that not only are wikis a platform that has 
greater potential in organizational and public use, but also 
that, from a design perspective, they provide a valuable 
opportunity for using the “sidewalk design strategy” of 
providing a field of grass and watching where and how the 
users walk, or so-called desire paths. This study provides a 
basis for describing these paths. Future studies in particular 
applications would do well to ask how these issues are 
addressed, capabilities are used, and how the activities and 
mechanisms that come into play can be helpfully reinforced 
or supported through the interface and infrastructure.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the members of the Online 
Community Research Group at Carnegie Mellon University 
and especially Bob Kraut and John Levine.
REFERENCES
1. Ahuja, M.K. and K.M. Carley, Network structure in 
virtual organizations. Organization Science, 1999. 
10(6): p. 741-757.
2. Barreto, M. and N. Ellemers, The impact of anonymity 
and group identification on progroup behavior in 
computer-mediated groups. Small Group Research, 
2002. 33(5): p. 590-610.
3. Baym, N., Interpreting soap operas and creating 
community: Inside a computer-mediate fan culture. 
Journal of Folklore Research, 1993. 30: p. 143-176.
4. Baym, N.K., Tune in, log on: Soaps, fandom, and 
online community. 2000, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications.
5. Bryant, S.L., A. Forte, and A. Bruckman, Becoming
wikipedia: Transformation of participation in a
1108
