CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
and policies in a variety of contexts, including teams, 
traditional organizations, and legal systems [29], different 
images of rules and policies are considered. In each case, 
examples and evidence are drawn from Wikipedia to 
illustrate that view of rules and policies. Following this we 
discuss the implications of the framework for understanding 
both the potential and likely outcomes of wiki efforts and 
design implications of the different perspectives for both 
wiki implementation and development of infrastructures for 
supporting wiki-like initiatives.
RULES, POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
In the broadest scope, terms like rules, policies, and 
guidelines all refer to the “explicit and implicit norms, 
regulations, and expectations that regulate the behavior of 
individuals and interactions between them” [29 p. 5]. 
Taken in its most general sense, this definition can also be 
seen as including informal or implicit norms and constraints 
that can significantly affect behavior and interaction, even 
though they are not formally recognized or recorded.
Given the widely discussed importance of informal norms 
in contexts such as open source projects [35, 41] and other 
online social settings [3, 4], it may be beneficial to equate 
formal and informal rules. In particular this approach 
suggests that insights and results from the study of explicit, 
formal rules and policies may be useful for understanding 
the development, application, and impact of informal rules 
and norms. However, in this study we focus on formal, or 
written, policies, rules, and guidelines.
We use the terms rules, policies, and guidelines 
interchangeably. While there are some contexts in which 
these are clearly conceptually distinguishable, the 
difference between and application of the terms vary from 
context to context. This suggests that while some aspects 
require distinguishing them from each other, there is not 
ready agreement on what they are or how the terms should 
be used. Furthermore, and for our purposes perhaps more 
importantly, this conceptual equivalence is reflected in the 
Wikipedia definitions which state:
“A guideline is any page that is: (1) actionable (i.e. it 
recommends, or recommends against, an action to be taken 
by editors) and (2) authorized by consensus. Guidelines are 
not set in stone and should be treated with common sense 
and the occasional exception.
A policy is similar to a guideline, only more official and 
less likely to have exceptions.” [48]
This study focuses on formal written policies for both 
practical and conceptual reasons. Practically, formal rules 
are ideal for study because of the relative ease of 
determining what the policy is, when it was put in place, 
who participated in creating it, when it was referenced, and, 
in some cases, when it was removed. This is particularly 
true in the context of a wiki because of its facilities for 
archiving and managing collaborative documents.
However, beyond the practical issues, formal written rules 
and policies are significant because of their role as 
boundary objects [33, 34], or as specifications of how the 
content will be used and communication will occur. They 
can serve a variety of purposes by virtue of the fact that 
they are explicit and external. Because they are explicit and 
visible, though, written policies and rules are often sites of 
conflict [29 p. 18]. These same characteristics also mean 
that written policies have greater potential as levers for 
developers, designers, and managers to affect a community 
or collaborative effort [10, 19].
Hence, while it may be the case that informal norms are 
important, it makes sense to focus on the nature and role of 
formal written rules and policies in the operation of a 
distributed collaborative effort like Wikipedia.
IMAGES AND ROLES OF RULES AND POLICIES 
Because of their centrality in so many aspects of society 
and organizational and individual behaviors, rules and 
policies have been studied by scholars in a wide variety of 
fields, including law, sociology, political science, 
economics, management science, anthropology, linguistics, 
and organizational studies. While these scholars typically 
adopt definitions similar to those described above, the 
assumptions they make about the source, nature, and 
implications of rules and policies can vary significantly.
While this lack of consensus can present challenges, it also 
provides a basis for characterizing the multifaceted nature 
of rules, policies, and guidelines.
In particular, prior work provides several perspectives 
which can be used to view rules and policies, including 
rules and policies as:
•	Rational efforts to organize and coordinate
•	Evolving, competing entities
•	Constructions of meaning &amp; identity
•	External signals
•	Internal signals
•	Negotiated settlements and trophies
•	Control mechanisms
In the following sections, we consider each of these 
perspectives. For each one we begin with a discussion of 
the core assumptions that are made about the nature and 
implications of policies playing this role with reference to 
principles and examples drawn from studies of rules in 
traditional organizational and social contexts. We then 
consider examples from Wikipedia that illustrate how the 
policies and guidelines there are consistent with the 
perspective.
The purpose of these discussions and examples is to 
illustrate how the guidelines and policies in Wikipedia, and 
the systems and mechanisms that operate around them, are 
multi-faceted. As such, these perspectives should not be
1102
