CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 2. Wikipedia 
Guideline Box
treated as a set of mutually exclusive categories, but rather 
as a set of potentially overlapping lenses, each of which 
highlights different aspects of the policies and guidelines 
that exist within Wikipedia.
Rules and Policies as Rational Efforts to Organize or 
Coordinate
All groups are faced with challenges created by 
communication and coordination problems which must be 
solved if the shared objectives are to be achieved [7, 13, 14, 
21, 38, 41]. In this view rules are conscious, intentional 
actions put in place for the purpose of improving collective 
performance. Rules and policies address, or at least 
substantially increase the chance of addressing, the 
problems of communication and coordination by creating a 
context in which distributed actions are taken in reliable 
and consistent ways [27]. In other words, rules and policies 
are means of solving communication and coordination 
problems by increasing the reliability and consistency of 
action (i.e., eliminating the need to explicitly communicate 
and coordinate) [29]. Rules in this role assume that all 
parties have the same motivations and goals.
Rules and policies for coordination and communication 
have been identified as particularly important in contexts 
where there is high turnover (people coming and going on a 
regular basis), where there is substantial autonomy of 
action, and where explicit coordination is costly and yet 
important to success of the activity [9, 25].
Rational Efforts to Organize or Coordinate in Wikipedia 
Wikipedia has high turnover in that a large majority of the 
editors make only a few changes once, the editors are 
distributed globally, and coordination is necessary in order 
to continuously provide a functioning product (i.e., an 
encyclopedia) on demand.
For Wikipedia, this perspective 
on rules and policies suggests 
that policies and guidelines are 
being put in place to achieve 
consistency and reliability in 
terms of how things are 
handled and coordinate efforts 
[23], but also to confirm the 
authority of those most likely 
to implement the policies: the 
administrators. For example, a 
policy was created which 
outlines the process which 
should be taken to block a user 
or delete an entry in 
Wikipedia. The 48 policies 
under consideration on the 
Wikipedia Policy proposals 
indicate the administrators’ continual need to reinforce their 
limited power over the dispersed population of this 
community.
Because of the decentralized 
nature of the role of user (i.e., 
editor) in Wikipedia and the high 
turnover, more written policies 
and guidelines are needed to 
facilitate the transfer of 
knowledge [40] from one user to 
the next and maintain 
consistency during the editing. 
Alternatively, fewer policies will 
be specified for administrators 
than users. There are more 
rules, therefore, for editors, since 
their population experiences 
greater turnover and their 
activities are more dispersed 
than those of the administrators 
[13, 14]. Also, since this 
population gains members more 
frequently than the 
administrators, written policies 
assist new people by lending 
them direction with their 
contributions, in a similar 
fashion as Frequently asked 
questions pages in online 
communities [6].
Most policy and guideline pages 
provide a box with general 
information about Wikipedia 
policy or guidelines, 
respectively, in the prominent 
upper right hand corner, as 
shown in Figures 1 and 2. The 
policies selected for emphasis 
are divided into two sections: 
one discussing procedures for 
editing articles and the other 
reminding users about 
behavioral standards.
These boxes serve to introduce first time participants to the 
norms of the hybrid community/document paradigm and 
remind more experienced and committed members about 
the essential rules. After all, according to the Wikipedia 
contributors, these policies and guidelines help make 
Wikipedia successful [48]. Also, since the items in these 
lists are links, they point readily to the written document for 
each of these policies.
Wikipedia editors suggest that policy is often enacted after 
it has been used in practice and recognized as important 
[48], such as to increase the speed, efficiency, or reduce the 
cost of administering the encyclopedia. These enactments 
embody the rational efforts of this role of a policy or 
guideline.
Figure 1. Wikipedia 
Policy Box
1103
