CHI 2008 Proceedings · Usability Evaluation Considered Harmful?	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
early designs, they are crude caricatures that suggest their 
usefulness, but are not yet developed enough to pass the test 
of usability. More importantly, usability evaluation tends to 
consider innovative products outside of their cultural 
context. Yet the reality is that it is the often unpredictable 
cultural uptake of the innovation that directs product 
evolution over time. These points are discussed below.
Usable or Useful?
Thomas Landauer eloquently argues in The Trouble with 
Computers that most computer systems are problematic 
because not only are they are too hard to use, but they do 
too little that is useful [19]. Most usability evaluation 
methodologies target the ‘too hard to use’ side of things: 
system designs are proven effective (‘easy to use’) when 
activities can be completed with minimal disruptive errors, 
efficient when tasks can be completed in reasonable time 
and effort, and satisfying when people are reasonably happy 
with the process and outcome [16,19]. The problem is that 
these measures do not indicate Landauer’s second concern: 
design usefulness.
This distinction between usability and usefulness is not 
subtle. Indeed, the technological landscape is littered with 
unsold products that are highly usable, but totally useless. 
Conversely – and often to the chagrin of usability 
professionals – many product innovations succeed because 
they are very useful and/or fashionable; they sell even 
though they have quite serious usability problems. In 
practice, good usability in many successful products often 
happens after – not before – usefulness. A novel and useful 
innovation (even though it may be hard to use) is taken up 
by people, and then competition over time forces that 
innovation to evolve into something that is more usable. 
The World Wide Web is proof of this; many early web 
systems were abysmal but still highly used (e.g., airline 
reservations systems); usability came late in the game.
However, usefulness is a very difficult thing to evaluate, 
especially by the usability methodologies common in CHI. 
In most cases, it is often evaluated indirectly by 
determining (perhaps through a requirements analysis) what 
tasks are important to people, and using those tasks within 
scenarios to seed usability studies. If people are satisfied 
with how they do these tasks, then presumably the system 
will be both usable and useful. Yet determining usefulness 
of new designs is hard. In the Innovator’s Dilemma, 
Christensen [5] argues that customers (and by extension 
designers who listen to them) often do not understand how 
new innovative technologies – especially those that seem to 
under-perform existing counterparts – can prove useful to 
them. It is left to ‘upstart’ companies to develop a 
technology: they find usage niches where it proves highly 
useful, and redesign it until it later (sometimes much later) 
becomes highly useful – and usable – in the broader cultural 
context.
Usability evaluation is predisposed to the world changing 
by gradual evolution; iterative refinement will produce
more usable systems, but not radically new ones. It is ill 
disposed towards discontinuities as suggested by the 
Innovator’s Dilemma, where sudden uptakes of useful or 
fashionable technologies by the community occur. If all we 
do is usability evaluation (which in turn favors iterative 
refinement), we will have a modest impact by making 
existing things better. What we will not do is have major 
impact by creating new innovations.
Engineering Innovations and Cultural Adoption
At the ACM UIST 2007 Panel on Evaluating Interface 
Systems Research, Scott Hudson distinguished the activities 
of ‘Discovery’ and ‘Invention’, and how they relate to 
evaluation methodologies. He said the goal of discovery is 
to find out facts of the world, whereas the goal of invention 
is to create and innovate new and useful things. Discovery, 
(normally the central task behind science), needs to 
meticulously detail facts so they may be used to craft 
theories that describe and/or predict phenomena. Rigorous 
and detailed evaluation is important in order to get the 
underlying facts upon which the theories rest 
correct. Typically we already understand the broad outlines 
or primary properties of the phenomena being studied, and 
make progress by looking at its very specific details (i.e., 
one or two variables) in order to distinguish between 
competing theories. In contrast, invention (normally the 
central task behind engineering and design) takes 
techniques – existing or new ones – that work in theory or 
in a lab setting, and extends them in often quite creative 
ways to work in the complexity of the real world. While 
rigorous evaluation may test a specific instant of that 
technique in a specific setting, concentrating on small 
details rarely predicts how variations of that technique will 
perform in other settings. The real world is complex and 
ever-changing: it is likely that ‘big effects’ are much more 
appropriate for study than small ones. Yet these ‘big 
effects’ are often much more difficult to evaluate with our 
classic usability evaluation methods.
Another way to say this is that usability evaluation, as 
practiced today, is appropriate for settings with well-known 
tasks and outcomes. Unfortunately, they fail to consider 
how novel engineering innovations and systems will evolve 
and be adopted by a culture over time. Let us consider a 
few historical examples to place this into context.
Marconi’s wireless radio. In 1901, Guglielmo Marconi 
conducted the first trans-Atlantic test of wireless radio, 
where he transmitted in Morse code the three clicks making 
up the letter ‘s’ between the United Kingdom and Canada 
[32]. If considered as a usability test, it is less than 
impressive. First, the equipment setup was onerous: he even 
had to use balloons to lift the antenna as high as possible. 
Second, the sound quality was barely audible. He wrote
“I heard, faintly but distinctly, pip-pip-pip. I handed the phone to 
Kemp: &quot;Can you hear anything?&quot; I asked. ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘The 
letter S.’ He could hear it.”
Yet his claim was controversial, with many scientists 
believing that the clicks were produced by random
116
