CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
the activity of blog reading is neither a dichotomy of 
blogger versus reader nor a set of transactions that are 
confined to the materiality of the blog. “It depends” 
describes how the experience of blog reading is highly 
contingent on the individual reader and not solely the blog.
“Being a Part”
When discussions with respondents turned to themes of 
participation in, and contribution to, the blogs they read, 
eleven of them described feeling that they were a “part” of 
a blog in some way. This is distinct from the feeling of 
membership or belonging in a community [6,12]. Some 
respondents felt that they were part of a blog without ever 
making their individual presence known to the blogger or 
other readers. Being part of a blog is more than consistent 
readership, a sense of community, or a feeling of 
connectedness, although it includes all those things.
Readership is one component to being a part of a blog. 
Connie stated that, “just by reading I feel like I’m 
participating.” Nevertheless, a few question if they are part 
of any of the blogs that they read. For Charles, the idea of a 
community is a central component to the definition of a 
blog, and thus he does not feel part of a blog because he 
does not consistently contribute as he might expect a 
community-member to do. Importantly, Charles reads 
mostly “big” blogs—ones that are relatively popular, 
generate a high volume of traffic, and receive copious 
comments—and while other participants could be a part of 
a big blog without commenting, some sort of interaction 
was necessary for Charles. While an important component 
of being a part, readership alone is often not sufficient.
Six of the fifteen participants said specifically that they felt 
“connected” to a blog or blogger. Kuwabara et al.’s 
examination of FaintPop [14] revealed that the ability to 
express things that might not be considered an important 
topic of conversation, such as moods, help construct a 
feeling of connectedness. In the blogosphere, such 
examples are lo-fi comments, ones that are short, do not 
convey much content-wise, and are relatively generic. 
These comments also share certain aspects with the 
communication afforded by the Virtual Intimate Object 
(VIO) [13], in that they are relatively low bandwidth 
communication but carry a high degree of meaning and 
value for both reader and blogger. However, of the 
participants who expressed a feeling of connectedness, only 
Natalie described a feeling of presence similar to FaintPop 
or the VIO. When reading travel blogs she feels as if she is 
traveling with the blogger, sharing the blogger’s 
experiences, supporting her or his travels. Furthermore, 
though lo-fi comments are not the exception, they are not 
the rule, either. Although Cheryl feels connected to one of 
the sports-fan blogs she reads, she has yet to feel the need 
to leave comments of any sort. On the one hand, there is an 
argument that the readers who do not comment are not 
really connected, or that those who comment are more 
connected. Drawing on reader response theory, this paper
argues instead that connectedness is constituted differently 
in different contexts; being a part of a blog looks different 
for different readers, and connectedness, even when 
achieved by different means, is still connectedness.
Connectedness does not always entail feeling connected to 
the blogger as a person. Despite the distinctive personal 
style and presentation of self in many blogs, not all readers 
visit blogs for the blogger. Instead, they are more interested 
in the content or information presented on the blog. Among 
our respondents, ten of fifteen read certain blogs because 
they know or are familiar with the blogger in person, while 
eleven of fifteen read certain blogs because they want 
information about a particular topic. However, motivations 
can change over time. During the interviews, eleven 
participants described situations where they began reading 
blogs for information purposes, but continued reading 
because they developed a connection with the blogger. 
Cheryl reads fourfour, a blog with pop culture news and 
commentary. Initially, she started reading for the blogger’s 
witty and insightful entries about hip hop and “snarky 
commentary” about reality TV shows. However, the 
blogger would also occasionally post about his cats.
At first, when he was posting pictures about his cat, not that I 
thought it was a little nutty, but it was like, ‘what’s the sense 
in doing this?’, but then I would read the entries and they 
would be really cute or hilarious pictures so then I became 
even a fan of the cat postings then I was like, ‘oh my god, this 
is so petty’.... he’s a charismatic person so pretty much any 
topic you’ll get some sort of satisfaction or chuckle...
Even though Cheryl was initially drawn to the blog for the 
content, she ended up feeling connected with the blogger 
due in part to the personal information with which he 
supplemented his posts. In contrast, there were no instances 
where a blog reader began reading a blog for the blogger, 
and despite a falling out or loss of feeling connected 
continued to read for the content. This pattern suggests that, 
contrary to previous findings [2,23], it is important not to 
conflate the blogger with the content of the blog when 
considering the perspective of the reader.
SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS
This section highlights salient themes from the above 
findings as well as potential implications. These include not 
only design implications, but also more broadly future 
research directions and societal implications.
Routine – All of our participants mentioned in some way 
the habitual nature of blog reading. Charles’ statement that 
reading blogs is “something that happens” frames the reader 
as passive, neither self-aware nor reflective about their 
reading. While some participants were conscious of why 
they read blogs, few were reflective of how they read. For 
example, participants rarely reflected on the routine or 
time-consuming nature of blog reading prior to 
participation in this study. This finding suggests that 
designing tools to raise self-awareness and encourage 
reflection could be valuable in transforming routinized blog
1118
