CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
experience of reading blogs. Participants were recruited 
through physical fliers posted on community bulletin 
boards and in public posting areas, as well as through 
online bulletin boards for the local community. The posted 
criteria were that respondents read at least 5 different blogs 
at least 2 to 3 times per week. In total, 23 individuals 
replied to these advertisements: 21 responded to the 
physical fliers, and 2 replied to the online postings. Of 
those, 19 fit our criteria (18 from the physical fliers and 1 
from the online postings). Some potential subjects decided 
not to participate or stopped responding, resulting in a total 
of 15 respondents. All participants were compensated up to 
$20 US depending on the extent of their participation. 
Participant names used in this paper are pseudonyms.
Three main data-gathering techniques were used: two semi- 
structured interviews with each participant, logging 
software to track reading patterns, and a survey to gather 
some basic data, such as demographics. Since there is little 
focus on blog readers in the existing literature, the first set 
of interviews were largely exploratory and generative; 
although there were specific themes on which this study 
was to focus, the first interview was also used to find other 
interesting themes or issues in our respondents’ blog 
reading practices. During the second interviews, 
participants were asked to discuss further some of the 
specific themes that emerged during the first round of 
interviews. Participants were also solicited to complete their 
second interview as a group interview. Four participants 
expressed interest in group interviews, but due to logistic 
constraints only one pair of participants completed the 
second interview as a group. One participant, Connie was 
unable to complete the second interview, and another, Jill, 
had to answer questions for the second interview via email. 
During both interviews, all participants spent time reading 
blogs as they normally would, showing and describing 
items of interest and parts of their blog-reading routines to 
the interviewer. All interviews and notes were transcribed 
and coded, initially using open coding and then 
transitioning to axial coding (see [18]). Coding was an 
iterative process during which two of the authors 
independently coded each interview transcript and then 
exchanged the transcripts to confer on the codes used and 
the themes they represented. The initial coding began after 
the completion of the first interviews, so that results from 
analysis of the first set of interviews helped inform and 
direct the second set. The axial codes form the basis for the 
findings reported below.
Participants were also asked to install logging software on 
their computers to track their blog reading. The logger was 
implemented as a plugin for IBM’s Web Intermediaries 
infrastructure [28], which recorded a series of time-stamped 
URLs. Unfortunately, most participants either elected not to 
install the logger or ran into technical difficulties. Since 
only five participants successfully ran the logger, an 
analysis of those logs is not presented here, but it was used 
to generate questions for some of the second interviews.
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
Table 1 presents a profile of our respondents. Because 
subjects were recruited from the geographical area around a 
university, many are students or recent graduates. That said, 
they represent a diverse set of blog reading habits and 
practices. The data presented in this table were collected 
through an online survey completed by all but one of the 
participants (Connie). “Regular blogs” is the number of 
blogs the participant reads on a regular basis as determined 
by the participant, “example blogs” are a selection of 
representative examples from the blogs she or he reads, and 
“tools” describes the technology the participant uses to find 
and to read blogs. Since the purpose of these data is not to 
make statistical inferences about blog readers but rather to 
help create a picture of the various participants, and since 
the sample is not sufficiently large to generate statistically 
significant results, no quantitative analysis is performed. 
For statistics about blog readers, see [16].
This section includes a description of blog reading practices 
that were common among most of our participants, along 
with some of the factors that influence the myriad 
differences in approaches to reading blogs. Drawing on this 
diversity in blog reading practices, the section then 
addresses the question “what is a blog?” from readers’ 
perspectives; discusses the presentation and perception of 
online identity, noting important similarities and differences 
with previous work; and describes ways in which readers 
can feel that they are “a part” of the blogs they read.
Common Blog Reading Practices
While reader-response theory helps make sense of the 
significant variations of the data, some aspects of our 
participants’ reading practices are fairly consistent. Thirteen 
explicitly stated that blog reading is a form of “chilling 
out”, “wasting time”, “brain candy”, or “doing nothing”, 
similar to the pottering activities described by Wyche et al. 
[27]. The other two later indicated on the survey that blog 
reading was “sometimes” an activity during periods of 
boredom. Similar to some instances of pottering, blog 
reading can also have a habitual nature. When Fern reads 
blogs, she adheres to a self-prescribed system, despite her 
lack of interest in the content of some posts she reads. 
Lillian indicated that reading blogs became part of her 
morning routine. When we asked Charles if he looked 
forward to reading blogs everyday he responded:
I don’t know if I look forward to [reading blogs]... I don’t 
really look forward to cigarettes anymore, but it’s something 
that happens through the course of the day that I feel like I 
might need to do. It just becomes habit, I guess.
Though in all likelihood most blog readers do not share 
Charles’s outlook on the intensity of blog reading’s 
addictiveness, blog reading often becomes habitual. For 
Krish, who has only been reading blogs for eight months, 
“checking blogs is like checking one’s email,” which is 
similar to the habitualness described by nine other 
participants. For many, checking email is a routine, almost
1113
