CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
This paper reports on the results of a qualitative study into 
the practices and culture of blog readers. How do readers 
contribute to and help shape the various blogs they read? 
When, why, and how do readers choose to comment? How 
do readers perceive the identity of the blogger? Do readers 
feel overwhelmed by the amount of information available 
through blogs? What habits do readers follow? While this 
paper cannot address these questions in their entirety, it is a 
first step toward understanding the role, contributions, and 
significance of the reader in the activity of blogging.
RELATED WORK
Recent work on blogging covers a wide range of topics (see 
[24] for an overview). This section highlights work that 
helps inform this study. Nardi [21] examined the social 
nature of blogging activity, illustrating that blogs are quite 
unlike a personal diary. Lenhart’s [15] work pointed to the 
slow development of norms given the decentralized and 
non-standardized activities that occur on and off blogs. 
Herring et al. [11] provide a genre analysis of weblogs. 
Within the emerging medium of blogs, boyd [1] addressed 
the need for self-awareness tools to manage the fluidity of 
identity presentation in blogs. Some have applied existing 
analytic tools, such as social network analysis, e.g., [8, 19], 
to show that blogs are not highly interconnected in a 
decentralized fashion, but rather grouped in numerous 
clusters of blogs with limited links between clusters. 
Studies using conversation analysis have suggested that 
conversations across blogs and amongst bloggers are 
limited to a small number of “A-list” blogs [10].
Here, our focus is the audience. In Lenhart’s examination of 
norm formation in blogging [15], she discusses the 
anonymity of the blog audience and their occasional 
terrifying effect on bloggers. Similarly, Reed [23] illustrates 
blogger self-censorship due to an audience made up of 
certain friends and family. boyd [2] describes the 
expectations that bloggers feel are placed on them by their 
audience and how bloggers negotiate the formation and 
fulfillment of these expectations. Nardi suggests that 
“readers create blogs as much as writers” [21:225], giving 
them an equal role in the activity of blogging. Despite 
acknowledging the presence and impact of an audience, no 
previous blogging research has made blog readers the 
primary focus. This paper aims to fill that gap.
The position of the blog reader is often an ambiguous one. 
Most research on blogs adopts the view that readers, 
commenters, and participants are also bloggers themselves, 
e.g., [8]. However, according to the statistics cited above, 
there is obviously a large discrepancy between bloggers and 
people who read blogs – not every reader is a blogger. The 
question becomes, when does one move from being a blog 
reader to a blogger? Is simply owning a blog enough, or 
must there be regular updates? What is the requisite update 
frequency? Despite indications to the contrary, are there 
any bloggers who do not read other blogs? It is be argued 
below that, rather than attempting to split individuals into
either the category of blogger or the category of reader, it 
might be more useful to consider the question in terms of 
degree of membership, where an individual may be both a 
blogger and a reader to varying and independent degrees. 
For the purposes of this study, we focus on those who have 
a high enough degree of readership to self-identify as a blog 
reader, regardless of their degree of bloggership.
THEORY
In examining the activities that surround blog reading, this 
study is partially informed by ideas from reader-response 
theory [3,17], which help provide a general framework with 
which to analyze the act of reading blogs. This section 
provides a brief introduction to reader-response theory, 
situating it in the context of literary criticism, and describes 
how the theory is applied in this paper.
Despite the general inclination to situate reader-response 
theory in opposition to formalism, which posits that only 
the materiality of the text is significant, it actually 
developed from within formalism itself (Tompkins, cited in 
[3]). In the 1950’s, reader-response theory branched out 
from formalist discourse under the auspices of Gibson’s 
“mock reader” – the persona a reader should adopt to 
understand the text [3]. Thus a slight variation within 
formalism became the seed from which the reader and her 
or his interpretation gained significance.
Later reader-response theorists, such as Crosman [3], 
argued specifically that the “construction of meaning 
ultimately resides in the auspices of readers, who approach 
literary texts... from their own subjective perspectives” 
[3:66]. This view is reminiscent of Nardi et al.’s [21] 
assertion that the reader and writer both participate in co- 
creating the blog, as well as Dourish’s [5] emphasis on 
viewing the user as a situated, embodied actor that actively 
engages with a system in context. As an extension of 
Crosman’s approach, Lewis [17] presents an alternate 
method of performing a literary critique. He suggests rather 
than judging books as good or bad and making assertions 
about someone’s tastes based on the books he or she reads, 
“let us try to discover how far it might be plausible to 
define a good book as a book which is read in one way, and 
a bad book as a book which is read in another way” [16:1]. 
He argues that “good literature [is] that which permits, 
invites, or even compels good reading” [16:104], and that 
examining the type of reading that a given work permits, 
invites, or compels can tell you about the merits of that 
work. While there may be questions as to what constitutes 
good reading, the purpose at hand is not to separate good 
blogs from bad. Rather, it is to explore the extent to which 
we may understand a blog not by features of its content, 
structure, or technological aspects, but rather by the type of 
reading practices in which readers of the blog engage.
METHODS
The authors chose to employ qualitative and ethnographic 
methods in order to gain an understanding of the subjective
1112
