CHI 2008 Proceedings · Usability Evaluation Considered Harmful?	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
atmospheric noise mistaken for a signal. Whether or not this 
‘usability test’ demonstrated the feasibility of wireless 
transmission, it is as interesting to consider how Marconi’s 
vision of how radio would be used changed dramatically 
over time. Marconi is purported to have envisioned radio as 
a means for maritime communication between ships and 
shore; indeed, this was one of its first uses. He did not 
foresee what we take as commonplace: broadcast radio.
The automobile. Wireless radio is more of an infrastructure 
enabling end user system development, and perhaps outside 
the scope of usability tests. Instead, consider the automobile 
as a different kind of innovation. Cars were designed with 
end users in mind. Yet early ones were expensive, noisy, 
and unreliable. They demanded considerable expertise to 
maintain and drive them. They were initially impractical, as 
there was little in the way of infrastructure to permit regular 
travel. It is only after they were accepted by society that 
ideas of ‘comfort’, ‘fashion’ and ‘ease of use’ crept into 
automobile design, and even that happened only because 
one company saw it as a competitive advantage.
Bush’s Memex. Let us now consider several great 
innovations in Computer Science in this context. In 1945, 
Vannevar Bush introduced the idea of cross-linked 
information in his seminal article As We May Think [2], 
which in turn inspired Hypertext and the World Wide Web. 
Bush described a system called ‘Memex’ based on linked 
microfilm records. Yet he never built it, let alone evaluated 
it. Bush’s vision wasn’t even correct: it was constrained to 
knowledge workers. He certainly never anticipated the use 
of linked records for what is now the mainstay of the web: 
social networking, e-commerce, pornography and 
gambling. Even if he had done a usability evaluation, it 
would have been based on tasks not considered central to 
today’s culture. Still, there is no question that this was a 
valuable idea with profound influence on how people 
considered and eventually developed a new technology.
Sutherland’s Sketchpad. In 1963, Ivan Sutherland produced 
Sketchpad, perhaps the most influential system in computer 
graphics and CAD [27]. Sketchpad was an impressive 
object-oriented graphics editor, where operators 
manipulated a plethora of physical controls (buttons, 
switches, knobs) in tandem with a light pen to create a 
drawing. No evaluation was done. Even if it were, it would 
probably have fared poorly due to the complexity of the 
controls and the poor quality display typical of this early 
technology.
Engelbart’s NLS. In 1968, Douglas Engelbart gave what is 
arguably the most important system demonstration ever 
held in Computer Science [10]. He and his team showed off 
the capabilities of his NLS system. His vision as realized by 
NLS had a profound influence on graphical interfaces, 
hypertext, and computer supported cooperative work. Yet 
Engelbart’s vision was about enhancing human intellect 
rather than ease of use. He believed that highly trained 
white collar people would use systems such as his to push
the envelope of what is possible. Engelbart also failed to 
envision or predict the cultural adoption of his technologies 
by everyday folks for mundane purposes: he was too 
narrowly focused on productive office workers. Similar to 
Memex, even if Engelbart had done usability tests, they 
would have been based on a user audience and set of tasks 
that do not encompass today’s culture.
Today’s Compelling Ideas. To put this into today’s 
perspective, we are now seeing many compelling ideas that 
suffer from limitations similar to the historic ones 
mentioned above. For example, consider the challenges of 
creating Ubiquitous Computing technologies (Ubicomp) for 
the home. Often, the technology required is too expensive 
(e.g., powerful tablet computers), the infrastructure is not in 
place (e.g., configuring hardware and wireless networks), 
the necessary information utilities are unavailable, or the 
system administration is too hard [9]. Even more important, 
the culture is not yet in place to exploit such technology: it 
is not a case of one person using Ubicomp, but of a critical 
mass of home inhabitants, relations, and friends adopting 
and using that technology. Only then does it become 
valuable. Again, cultural and technical readiness is needed 
before a system can be deemed ‘successful’. How does one 
evaluate that except after the fact? Do usability evaluations 
of toy deployments really test much of interest?1
As a counterpoint, consider the many highly successful 
social systems now available on the web: Youtube, 
Facebook, Myspace, Instant Messaging, SMS, and so on. 
From an interface and functionality perspective, most of 
these systems can be considered quite primitive. Indeed, we 
can even criticize them for their poor usability. For 
example, Youtube does not allow one to save a viewed 
video. Thus one must be online to view a previously seen 
video; one must buffer the entire video even though only a 
fragment at the end is wanted; one must wait. Yet usability 
issues such as these are minor in terms of the way the 
culture has found an innovation useful, and how the culture 
adopted and evolved its use of such systems.
Discussion. There are several points to make about the 
above examples.
1. The innovations – whether ideas or working ones – were 
instances of a vision of what computer interfaces could 
be like. It is the vision – even if inaccurate – as well as 
the technology that was critical.
2. The visions foresaw the creation of a new culture of use, 
where people would fundamentally change what they 
would be able to do.
3. None of the inventions were immediately realized as 
products. Indeed, there was a significant lapse of time 
before the ideas within them were successfully 
incorporated into new products.
1They do, but as a way to inform design critique and reflection 
rather than testing. This interpretative use of testing is not 
normally considered part of our traditional process.
117
