CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
MOTIVATION AND RESEARCH GOALS
This paper reports on a series of studies in which the Topobo 
system [10] (fig. 2), a 3D constructive assembly with kinetic 
memory, was provided to educators and designers to use in 
the context of their day-to-day work, over extended periods 
of time. Over the past three years, tens of thousands of 
people in Europe, Asia and North America have experienced 
Topobo in settings ranging from classrooms, museums, 
festivals, workshops, community centers, and homes. While 
numerous, many of the interactions were very short in 
exposure and confirmed the initial findings of the original 
Topobo studies. As part of a deeper question concerning 
the potential educational impact of a tangible interface, we 
sought to turn sets of Topobo over to educators to address 
issues related to large-scale use of a tangible for learning:
•	In what contexts and environments can Topobo succeed?
•	Over what time period will children use Topobo, and how 
will their use and interpretations of the system evolve?
•	What age children will benefit from Topobo, and how will 
their experiences differ?
•	What uses will other educators invent with Topobo?
The Topobo system
Topobo is a 3D constructive assembly system with the ability 
to record and playback physical motion. Topobo uses a 
programming by demonstration model (fig. 3). By snapping 
together a combination of Passive (static) and Active 
(motorized) components, people can quickly assemble 
dynamic biomorphic forms like animals with Topobo, 
animate those forms by pushing, pulling, and twisting them, 
and observe the system repeatedly play back those motions. 
For instance, a child can build a dog and teach it how to walk 
by twisting the dog’s body. The dog will then walk on its 
own. Normally, in a structure with many Actives, all of the 
actives will synchronously record or playback their own local 
motions. However, if a special active called a Queen is used, 
all of the other actives will mimic the Queen’s motion.
The original evaluation of Topobo, conducted in classrooms 
with children ages 5-13 suggested that children develop 
syntonic relationships with Topobo creations and that their 
experimentation with Topobo allows them to learn about 
movement and animal locomotion through comparisons 
of their creations to their own bodies. Children explored 
physics concepts like dynamic balance, center of gravity,
Figure 2. a) The Topobo System: an Active surrounded by
Passives b) a Topobo ‘moose’ designed by 2 eighth grade girls in
the original Topobo evaluation
torque/leverage and system behavior in their experiments 
with the system [10].
METHODOLOGY
As part of a research initiative pursuing outreach for 
educational technologies [4], Topobo was reengineered 
and mass produced with the specific purpose of providing 
educators with a new means to explore motion construction 
and kinematics principles. This manufacturing effort was 
funded by a modest educational outreach grant and required 
two years of extensive collaboration with an Asian toy 
manufacturer. Sets of manufactured Topobo were then 
distributed to educators (teachers, museum developers, 
educational researchers, graduate students) in the United 
States and Europe. The sets included Actives, Passives, basic 
Queens, power supplies and cables, and simple booklets. The 
booklets described the project concept, design and technical 
details, instructions for programming, and three sample 
creations with basic assembly instructions. The educators 
were also directed to the Topobo website which contains 
additional videos, published papers and visual materials.
Extensive data has been collected over the past year and a 
half, mostly in the form of interviews with educators and 
educational researchers working with Topobo. We are 
seeking to examine the perspective of the educators, and their 
reactions and plans when presented with Topobo as a new 
educational toy or kinetic material. We report how Topobo 
was used by various educators and what kind of initiatives, 
programming, or curricula they developed in these different 
environments when the researcher was removed entirely 
from designing a study or guiding the technology. In this
Figure 3. Programming Topobo a) plug in Active b) press button to record c) turn the axis with a motion d) press button for playback
1130
