CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Topobo in the Wild
Longitudinal Evaluations of Educators Appropriating a Tangible Interface
Amanda Parkes, Hayes Raffle and Hiroshi Ishii
Tangible Media Group
MIT Media Lab
20 Ames St.
Cambridge, MA 02139
{amanda, hayes, ishii}@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
What issues arise when designing and deploying tangibles 
for learning in long term evaluation? This paper reports on a 
series of studies in which the Topobo system, a 3D tangible 
construction kit with the ability to record and playback 
motion, was provided to educators and designers to use over 
extended periods of time in the context of their day-to-day 
work. Tangibles for learning - like all educational materials 
- must be evaluated in relation both to the student and the 
teacher, but most studies of tangibles for learning focus on 
the student as user. Here, we focus on the conception of 
the educator, and their use of the tangible interface in the 
absence of an inventor or HCI researcher. The results of this 
study identify design and pedagogical issues that arise in 
response to distribution of a tangible for learning in different 
educational environments.
Author Keywords:
Tangible User Interface, Learning, Digital Manipulative, 
Education, Case Studies
ACM Classification Keywords:
K.3.1: Computers and Education: Computer Uses in 
Education H.5.2 User Interfaces: Evaluation/Methodology
INTRODUCTION
Tangibles for learning [7] have sought to build on the success 
of educational manipulatives and constructivist learning 
while engaging learners in new ideas about dynamic systems 
through the use of hands-on experimentation with embedded 
computer technologies. The design principles behind Tangible 
User Interfaces [5] include leveraging natural metaphors of 
object usage and taking advantage of people’s inherent skills 
and assumptions about the physical world. This research has 
yielded numerous projects which have sought to create tools 
and environments which make accessible to children many
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
Figure 1. Children play with Topobo at a festival in Denmark
of the complex and temporal processes that computers can 
model and demonstrate well.
Because of the physical nature of tangibles, large scale 
deployment (which could be much more easily accomplished 
in a software system) is challenging; it is difficult and 
expensive to produce and maintain the extensive hardware 
necessary. Research projects are generally evaluated in small 
scale user studies run by the researchers who created them, 
and who are looking to qualitatively examine a planned 
hypothesis and evaluate the children’s experiences and/or 
use of the interface. Such studies often employ observation 
and interview with the users, and follow an ethnographic 
model of qualitative evaluation. However, ethnographic 
methodology has shown that in real world situations, the issues 
and results that people confront with products or systems 
are often divergent of the designer’s assumptions, and often 
arise when the designer is removed from the scenario [15]. 
While there has been one prominent tangible programming 
system that was evaluated at length in an educational context 
with students [14], our research focuses design evaluation 
on teachers as users rather than on children as users. The 
precedent of this approach was established by Rode in the 
technique of Curriculum-Focused design [12]. The results of 
this study seek to further the understanding and implications 
of the appropriation of technology in educational settings by 
educators, as originally discussed by Salomon [13], among 
others.
1129
