CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
You Can Touch, but You Can’t Look:
Interacting with In-Vehicle Systems
&apos;Kenneth Majlund Bach, &apos;Mads Gregers Jæger, &apos;,2Mikael B. Skov and &apos;Nils Gram Thomassen
1Department of Computer Science	2Department of Information Systems
Aalborg University	The University of Melbourne
Selma Lagerlöfs Vej 300, 9220 Aalborg East	111 Barry Street, Carlton, 3006
Denmark		Victoria, Australia
{kenned, hunter, dubois, nmyt}@cs.aau.dk
ABSTRACT
Car drivers are nowadays offered a wide array of in-vehicle 
systems i.e. route guidance systems, climate controls, music 
players. Such in-vehicle systems often require the driver’s 
visual attention, but visual workload has shown significant 
less eyes-on-the-road time and affects driving performance. 
In this paper, we illustrate and compare three different 
interaction techniques for in-vehicle systems. We refer to 
them as tactile, touch, and gesture interaction. The focus of 
the techniques is the effects on drivers while driving cars. 
We evaluated the interaction techniques with 16 subjects in 
two settings. Our results showed that gesture interaction has 
a significant effect on the number of driver eye glances 
especially eye fixations of more seconds. However, gesture 
interaction still required rapid eye glances for hand/eye 
coordination. On the other hand, touch interaction leads to 
fast and efficient task completion while tactile interaction 
seemed inferior to the two other interaction techniques.
Author Keywords
In-vehicle systems, visual attention, gesture interaction, 
touch interaction, tactile interaction, driving, eye glances
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: Interaction styles
INTRODUCTION
Designing for mobility is rather challenging as mobile users 
and mobile use are characterized by great diversity and 
done for different purposes. As designers we need to enable 
users to interact with technologies during travelling, trips, 
journeys, hikes, visits, or rides. An increasingly important 
area for human-computer interaction within mobility is the
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00
design of in-vehicle systems. With significant advances in 
technology, car drivers are nowadays offered a wide array 
of in-vehicle systems i.e. route guidance systems, climate 
controls, music players. As emerging vehicles constantly 
offer additional and more advanced in-vehicle systems, the 
side effects of in-vehicle systems become more significant. 
Several research studies illustrate that interacting with such 
in-vehicle systems while driving highly challenges drivers’ 
attention on the primary task of driving [12, 16, 22].
Visual attention stands out as the most important attention 
property when driving vehicles. Not surprisingly, research 
on visual workload has shown significant less eyes-on-the-
road time when drivers interact with in-vehicle systems 
with high visual demands and this directly affects driving 
performances [11, 24].
However, many vehicles are today shipped with a built in 
touch screens which highly depends on visual attention. 
Such touch-based screens are typically being employed to 
enable the driver to interact with novel functions as well as 
established functions. Consequently, simple control 
operations (e.g. using a fan speed dial) have become more 
complicated requiring a number of discrete steps 
interactions (e.g. mode selection, option choice, adjustment 
setting). Taking the immediate safety critical aspects of 
driving into account, Green recommends that we need to 
identify and investigate new interaction techniques that are 
more suited for in-vehicle systems [10].
This paper compares three different interaction techniques 
for in-vehicle systems. Inspired by previous research (i.e. 
[1, 2, 19, 24]), we identify and refer to tactile, touch, and 
gesture interaction for in-vehicle systems. The interaction 
techniques are illustrated and manifested through three 
different music players and are compared on their effects on 
primary and secondary driving tasks performances and on 
visual attention of the driver. The paper is organized as 
follows. First, we illustrate related work on in-vehicle 
systems interaction. Secondly, we illustrate the interaction 
techniques. Thirdly, we outline an experiment where the 
techniques are compared against each other and findings are 
presented and illustrated. Finally, we discuss our results.
1139
