CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
We used a similar approach in simulated driving where the 
subjects were given time to adjust to the steering sensitivity 
and the simulator driving sensation. For the evaluation, the 
subjects were told to drive between 50 and 70 km/h and to 
stay in the middle of the road. The driving simulator used 
four cameras to capture eye movements and interaction of 
the subjects.
Data Analysis
We chose to integrate several parameters for the assessment 
of the interaction techniques. From a literature review on 
in-vehicle systems research, we identified and illustrated a 
number of relevant dependent measures for assessing the 
quality of the three interaction techniques and their effects 
on the driver and the driving [2]. The included measures in 
the experiment were:
1. Primary driving task performance
2. Secondary driving task performance 
3. Eye glance behaviour
Further, we measured subjective attitudes of the subjects 
towards the interaction techniques.
1) We measured primary driving task performance through 
lateral and longitudinal control errors (inspired by i.e. [1, 
16, 25]). Lateral control incidents were defined as attention 
related loss of vehicle lateral control (lane excursions, 
steering wheel input, etc.) while longitudinal control errors 
denote incidents where subjects had problems controlling 
vehicle velocity (speed maintenance, acceleration, etc.).
Lateral and longitudinal control errors were identified by 
reviewing video recordings and logs. Two authors of this 
paper both reviewed all 48 video recordings separately by 
identifying, classifying, and reporting incidents. Their lists 
of incidents were then compared and merged into one final 
incidents list. An inter-rate reliability test of this analysis 
(weighted Cohen’s Kappa) gave a=0.92. This corresponds 
to an excellent agreement according to Fleiss [7].
2) We integrated secondary driving task performances to 
include task effectiveness (task completion and interaction 
errors) and task efficiency (total task completion time). 
Task effectiveness is a common measure when conducting 
in-vehicle research (i.e. [1, 15, 16, 27]) as well as efficiency 
(i.e. [5, 24]).
Interaction errors were identified from the video recordings 
based on different criteria due to the nature of the systems 
representing each interaction technique. For the tactile 
interaction technique, interaction errors were defined as 
unsuccessful attempts to press a specific button or selecting 
a wrong control for the assignment (e.g. using the volume 
control when asked to skip one track forward). For the 
touch and gesture interaction techniques, interaction errors 
were automatically logged when touching any non-button 
part of the surface (touch) or producing a non-recognized 
gesture (gesture).
The task completion times for touch and gesture interaction 
were measured through the data log entries of the sessions 
as the laptop running the two players also logged task data. 
As tactile interaction offered no such data, it was necessary 
to manually measure task completion times through video 
analysis. Two authors reviewed all 48 video recordings 
independently by measuring the task completion times for 
all 1440 assignments. Due to the nature of this data, no 
inter-rate reliability tests were conducted, but an average 
was calculated from the list of the two authors. To get the 
total task completion times (including the time it took for 
participants to move their hand to and from the system), a 
constant was added to the values from the interaction log. 
The constant was calculated using a stopwatch on a sample 
of 20 assignments for both systems and was set to 660 
milliseconds.
3) Eye glance is probably the most common predicator of 
driver attention and is an accepted measure for in-vehicle 
system evaluations as the link between visual attention and 
driving performance (i.e. [8, 21, 26]. We divided eye 
glances into three categories according to their duration 
(less than 0.5 seconds, 0.5-2.0 seconds and above 2.0 
seconds). These categories are motivated in the following.
Eye fixations (when the eyes dwell on something) are 
typically glances over 0.5 seconds and can be used as an 
indication of what a driver is attentive towards [26]. This 
defines the boundary between two categories; below and 
above the eye fixation time of 0.5 seconds. Also, research 
suggests that drivers are very reluctant to continue without 
roadway information for more than 2 seconds also known 
as the “2-second rule” [21, 27]. This defines the boundary 
between two others of our categories; eye glances of more 
than 2 seconds.
We classified eye glances according to whether they were 
below 0.5 seconds, between 0.5-2.0 seconds, or above 2.0 
seconds using video analysis. Two authors independently of 
each other classified eye glances in the 48 video recordings. 
Their classification were then compared and an inter-rate 
reliability test (weighted Cohen’s Kappa) showed a=0.71 
suggesting substantial agreement according to Fleiss [7]. 
Due to the number of disagreements, a third author would 
review all incidents (where the two authors disagreed) and 
classify them according to the categories.
The questionnaire included questions on the subjective 
preferences towards the interaction techniques. We used a 
5-point scale on perceived workload, concurrent driving 
performance, and ease of use. Their answers served as input 
for the subsequent interview sessions.
RESULTS
This section presents the results from the data analysis for 
each measure. We present results in the following order: 
primary driving task performance, secondary driving task 
performance, eye glance behaviour, driving settings impact, 
and satisfaction. All results were subjected to one-way
1143
