CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
RELATED WORK
Most in-vehicle systems research focus on how to minimize 
driver workload and how to reduce visual attention on such 
systems [2]. As touch sensitive interfaces are finding their 
way into more vehicles (i.e. where drivers typically can 
control media centres, climate controls etc.), a characteristic 
assumption is that we need to look past the capabilities of 
tactile feedback and search for new techniques that require 
no (or very limited) visual attention. Traditionally, the car 
requires little visual attention to master i.e. gear selection, 
throttle control, or steering wheels.
Touch-based and tactile-based interaction techniques have 
been investigated on their abilities to support drivers when 
interacting with in-vehicle systems. Several studies explore 
opportunities and limitations of these techniques [5, 17, 24]. 
Bellotti et al. compared a haptic-based force-feedback 
knobble against a touch-based interface on a configurable 
touch screen. They found that the tactile interface 
performed better on visual demanding tasks and also in 
relation to eyes-off-the-road frequency and duration [5]. 
Tsimhoni and Green identified a similar result where touch- 
based interaction required higher visual attention, but it also 
involved lowered driving performance [24]. They noticed 
that drivers wandered more in their lane and departed from 
their lane more frequently. Also, drivers made shorter 
glances at the interface, had a higher number of glances, but 
waited longer between glances. If driving conditions got 
difficult and thus visual demands for driving were high, 
task completion times increased. Finally, Noy et al. found 
that manipulation tasks performed on a touch screen were 
significantly more mentally demanding than radio tuning 
tasks simply because it required significant visual attention 
as a consequence of the lack of tactile and kinaesthetic 
feedback [17].
While touch-based and tactile-based techniques seem to 
suffer from a number of inherent limitations in terms of 
reducing visual attention, two other techniques potentially 
provide attention low interaction – i.e. speech recognition 
and gesture-based interaction. Speech recognition stands 
out as a potentially useful technique for in-vehicle systems 
interaction as it provides both hands-free and eye attention 
free interaction (at least in theory). Barón and Green [4] 
state, however, that speech recognition is highly cognitive 
demanding and it has been characterized as both impractical 
and flawed in regard to in-vehicle interaction [8].
Gesture-based interaction, on the other hand, could provide 
a suitable alternative to speech recognition as it overcomes 
some of the inherent impracticalities of spoken language 
while driving. Alpen and Minardo explored gesture-based 
interaction with in-vehicle systems [1]. In an experiment 
using driving simulators, subjects performed entertainment 
tasks, (e.g. find a song, search presets, adjust volume) with 
both a gesture interface on the windshield and a 
conventional radio. Subjects in the gesture condition made 
fewer driving errors than radio interface subjects, however 
not significantly fewer errors. Further, subjects preferred
the gesture interface to the radio, because it allowed them to 
keep eyes and attention on the driving. Subjects did not 
have to reach and touch anything and gesture interaction 
allowed them to be less accurate while being successful.
Pirhonen et al. compared a gesture-based interface to a 
touch-based interface for an on-the-go MP3 music player 
[19]. They stressed the importance for mobile users to focus 
their visual attention on the world around them and not on 
the device (drivers are typically in a similar situation). They 
found that overall workload was significantly reduced as 
well as overall task completion time for the gesture-based 
interface. Further, gesture interaction facilitated the primary 
task (of walking) as the walking speed was closer to the 
participants’ preferred walking speed. No difference was 
found in the number of errors made between the two types 
of interfaces.
IN-VEHICLE SYSTEM INTERACTION
Based on previous research on interaction techniques for in- 
vehicle systems and inspired by Pirhonen et al. [19], we 
present tactile, touch, and gesture interaction as alternatives 
to in-vehicle interaction techniques. The three techniques 
(tactile, touch and gesture) are represented by individual 
systems in order to demonstrate and compare the qualities 
and problems regarding attention.
One type of well-established in-vehicle systems is common 
car stereos or music players. For this experiment, we opted 
to use music players as case systems to represent the three 
interaction techniques (i.e. [1, 19]). The different types of 
interaction are not unique to the domain of music players 
and were chosen as case systems to allow direct comparison 
of the interaction techniques. The terms tactile interaction, 
touch interaction and gesture interaction will be used when 
discussing the three music players that manifest the 
respective interaction techniques.
Tactile Interaction
The tactile interaction was represented by an off-the-shelf 
car stereo with CD functionality. The product was a xZound 
CDX5 and is illustrated in figure 1.
Figure 1. The conventional car stereo (Xzound CDX5) used for 
the tactile interaction. Play/pause is located at the lower 
middle part (1), skip forward/back is located in the lower right 
(2), and the volume is controlled via the knob to the left (3).
Prior to selecting the specific model standard functionalities 
were investigated in car stereos to ensure that any model we 
would select was both representative and intuitive. The car 
stereo was selected due to its traditional looks and its 
conventional interface. The car stereo operates via tactile 
interaction with either the buttons at the lower part of the
1140
