CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
two other interaction techniques. Having said that, tactile 
interaction illustrated a few strengths and opportunities not 
directly visible in the findings section. The tactile feedback 
was much appreciated by the subjects (though they did not 
stress this to a be lack for the other interaction techniques) 
who used the sensation of the physical buttons on the car 
stereo to “scan” for the appropriate buttons. However, it did 
not lead to fewer eye glances than with touch interaction.
The subjects generally used time performing the tasks when 
using tactile interaction, though there were certain tasks 
which benefited immensely from the tactile input style. 
This was for instance the case with volume adjustment, 
where a knob on the car stereo allowed the participants to 
quickly scroll to an appropriate volume level, which is in 
line with Tsimhoni and Green [24]. Gonzàlez et al. present 
a similar but different tactile interaction technique where 
drivers interact with in-vehicle systems through a thumb- 
based interaction technique [9]. Their objective was to have 
eyes on the road and hands on the wheels and they found 
that the thumb-based interaction technique could be a 
promising mean for in-vehicle systems input.
Touch Interaction
Touch interaction presented itself as the fastest and easiest 
interaction technique. It produced better results (although 
not significantly better) compared to the tactile interaction 
on eye glances and total task completion times. As touch 
interaction featured no tactile feedback (except for that of 
touching the screen surface) we initially expected that it 
would require substantially more eye glances in order to 
accommodate the same set of tasks compared to tactile 
interaction. This would be in line with the findings of [25]. 
However, we did discover this pattern presumably due to a 
rather simple interface compared to the more complex car 
stereos.
It may be argued that touch interaction benefited too much 
from the superior display capabilities allowing reasonable 
few buttons to be arranged in a manner that would facilitate 
interaction better than the smaller and more complicated car 
stereo. This is partly true. But touch-based screens make it 
possible to customize and alter the appearance of the 
interface; something that traditional tactile interface cannot 
simply provide. Button size and interface density certainly 
influence the accuracy and effectiveness of touch display 
[20]. Kristoffersen and Ljungberg found that touch screens 
had very high visual demands and was not suitable for use 
in attention limited situations [14]. This was confirmed by 
our study as touch-based interaction subjects produced 
almost as many eye glances as tactile interaction and in fact 
yielding more long duration eye glances than tactile 
interaction.
Gesture Interaction
Gesture interaction presented an interesting alternative for 
interacting with in-vehicle systems. As with the two other 
techniques it has its pronounced merits and shortcomings. 
As hypothesized, gesture interaction excels by its low
visual demand. Our subjects used significantly fewer eye 
glances to perform assignments when using the gesture- 
based interaction. Most interestingly, we found no long 
duration eye glances (above 2 seconds), which are 
particularly devastating in terms of driving performance [6]. 
However, gesture interaction did not prove to be an eyes- 
free interaction technique as subjects often needed quick 
glances to support the coordination. This was also found by 
Alpern and Minardo who concluded that gesture interaction 
will not work in practice without eye glances [1].
We find it interesting that gesture interaction did not lead to 
significantly higher driving performance (in terms of fewer 
lateral or longitudinal errors), as subjects used only half the 
amount of eye glances compared to the other interaction 
techniques. Our findings seem to question the relationship 
between eyes-off-the-road-time and driving performance 
(i.e. [8, 21, 26]). It could be argued that the mental 
workload associated with gesture interaction (remembering 
the right gesture, remembering the system status, etc.) 
equals out the advantage gained by the limited eye glances, 
as it is known to be the case with speech recognition [4, 8]. 
But we have only limited results illustrating this. Perhaps 
somewhat surprisingly, gesture interaction did not result in 
more errors made than the other two conditions and the 
subjects were able to complete just as many tasks as with 
the tactile and touch interaction interfaces.
Our findings illuminate some limitations with the gesture 
interaction technique. One serious limitation was the lack of 
passive feedback, i.e. feedback on the current status of the 
systems and variable values. The implementation of gesture 
interaction for this experiment sought to remedy this 
deficiency by using a set of earcons as auditory feedback. 
We were inspired by Pirhonen et al. [19] who combined 
gesture input and earcons for a mobile music player. They 
found that this type of auditory feedback helped users in 
gaining an understanding of the current system status. We 
found, on the hand, that non-persistent feedback (such as 
earcons) was easily misunderstood, ignored, or missed. This 
happened several times, i.e. as subjects would fail to realize 
that they had paused the song or kept trying to increase the 
volume even though they were at the highest volume level.
Task completion time analysis revealed that using gesture 
interaction was generally more time consuming than touch 
interaction and was significantly slower on the adjusting the 
volume. In general, gesture interaction worked less well 
when it came to quickly adjusting properties, at least in the 
way gesture interaction was implemented in our study. To 
increase volume, subjects would have to input the “volume 
up” gesture several times. Some subjects suggested the 
implementation of more gestures, but again this could 
compromise how well drivers remember all gestures.
Subjects were mostly satisfied with the gesture interaction 
technique mainly due the fact that it allowed them to keep a 
focus on the road. Alpern and Minardo support this finding 
that drivers recognize the qualities of gesture interaction in
1146
