CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
The primary dependent measures were primary driving task 
performances (longitudinal and lateral control), secondary 
driving task performances (interaction errors and task 
completion times), and eye glance behavior. Additionally, 
satisfaction was measured as a secondary measure. The 
dependent measures are further elaborated and discussed in 
the data analysis section.
Driving Settings
We integrated two different driving settings for the testing 
of the interaction techniques. We refer to them as controlled 
driving and simulated driving (i.e. [2]). This allowed us to 
identify and explore similarities and differences between 
the different driving situations and to address problems that 
might be associated with either the controlled driving or the 
simulated driving. This paper primarily addresses the three 
interaction techniques; specific findings and discussion of 
the driving settings can be found in [3].
Controlled Driving
The controlled driving took place at a driving facility in 
Aalborg, Denmark normally used for training purposes (see 
figure 5). Subjects drove on a 3.2 km test track and there 
were no other road users on the facility at the time of the 
experiment. The track was equipped with various driving 
features to mimic low-density rural driving conditions i.e. 
simple curve exercises and simple slalom areas. Also, the 
track had a speeding camera and traffic lights. The vehicle 
used for the experiment was a 3-door Opel Astra.
Figure 5. Vehicle setup with the touch interaction and gesture 
interaction players running off a touch screen (left). The car 
stereo (tactile interaction) is placed just below. Subject driving 
the vehicle used in the experiment (right).
Besides swapping the original car stereo with the one 
needed for the experiment, a 17” flat touch screen (of which 
only a 7” section was used) was attached to the centre 
console. The tactile car stereo was placed in the middle of 
the centre console and the touch screen was mounted on the 
top part of the same console.
Simulated Driving
The simulated driving took place in the HCI laboratory at 
Aalborg University decorated as a medium-fidelity driving 
simulator. The driving simulator consisted of a set of force 
feedback steering wheel and pedals to control a vehicle in a 
PlayStation based simulation (Gran Turismo 3).
Figure 6. Frame from the laboratory video feed showing a 
participant driving the simulator while using gesture 
interaction (left). Setup in the driving simulator with force- 
feedback steering wheel and car seats (right).
A similar car and circuit was selected for the simulation. To 
enhance the driving experience, the windshield image was 
projected onto a 2 x 2-meter canvas directly in front of the 
driver. Driver and passenger car seats were integrated to 
promote a more realistic driving environment. The touch 
screen and car stereo were placed in the same position as in 
they were in the controlled driving setting.
Tasks
Thirty smaller assignments were used in all 48 sessions. 
The tasks were introduced to the subjects verbally readout 
by the test manager. All tasks could be completed by using 
the basic functionality offered by each of the interaction 
technique.
Procedure
The procedures for the two experiment settings were made 
as identical as possible. All participants were introduced to 
the three systems prior to the testing sessions. This involved 
an introduction to the basic functionality of the systems and 
the gestures for the gesture-based interaction. Moreover, the 
subjects were asked to complete some smaller exercises to 
ensure that the functionality was understood correctly.
The controlled driving subjects were introduced to the 
vehicle and the driving facility. They were asked to drive 
around the course a few times to familiarize themselves 
with both the facility and the car. During this practice, the 
test manager would introduce the track and explain the 
procedure and give general driving instructions. Subjects 
were asked to drive casually around the circuit at a speed of 
app. 50 km/h. In addition, they were told to drive as they 
would normally do and to adhere to a few simple driving 
tasks that were scattered around the circuit, i.e. the traffic 
lights and the speeding camera where they were asked to 
get as close to 60 km/h as they could. These tasks were 
presented in an attempt to create a higher sense of realism. 
The vehicle was equipped with two cameras to capture eye 
movements and interaction of the subjects. A GPS device 
was positioned in the car to provide information about the 
vehicle speed. The GPS data combined with the laptop data 
log would also prove useful as a statistical analysis tool 
concerning the vehicle speed and position on the circuit for 
each interaction event.
1142
