CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Usability Issues
The evaluation uncovered a wide range of usability issues 
that have since helped us improve Magitti. We discuss two 
of the most prominent types of issue here.
User Control: Even when recommendations were seen as 
appropriate, people wanted more control in managing the 
recommendation list itself. They especially wanted the 
ability to sort the items by factors such as rating, price, or 
distance. They also wanted to be able to remove items from 
the list for a given session. Even though they might 
generally like a certain Thai restaurant, for example, if they 
weren’t in the mood for Thai they didn’t want to keep 
seeing it in the list. They also wanted to be able to filter the 
list not just by general activity (Eat, Shop), but also by 
subtype (Pizza, Shoe Stores). This last ability has since 
been added.
Social Use: Over half the Magitti outings involved two or 
more people, and yet people found it challenging to 
incorporate Magitti into a social setting. Users tended to 
walk with their head down staring at the screen or 
manipulating the interface. Even when they read the 
information aloud, they didn’t always engage the other 
person. Of the eight who used it with a companion, five 
reported that the other person got annoyed at them at some 
point for not paying enough attention to them or their 
surroundings. The more successful social uses occurred 
when one person used Magitti ahead of time to narrow 
down the choices and then asked for input once they were 
near the venues. Another useful strategy was to stop and 
look at it together to make a decision and then put it away 
while walking, except perhaps to check the map. Only one 
pair shared the device itself, passing it back and forth and 
reading aloud from it as they walked, although both said 
they preferred to be the one not holding the device so they 
could look around. This finding reminds us of the inherent 
contrast in using a personal device for a social experience 
and challenges us to find more graceful ways to design 
small portable devices to fit into inherently social settings.
CONCLUSIONS
Based on extensive field work in Tokyo, we developed a 
novel context- and activity-aware mobile leisure guide 
system, code-named Magitti. It predicts the user’s current 
and future leisure activity and uses this, along with models 
of the user’s preferences, to filter and recommend relevant 
content. The interface uses a novel one-handed, thumb- 
based interaction. Despite expected technical problems with 
network delays and lack of comprehensive content, our 
evaluation suggests that Magitti is useful as a guide for 
leisure activities in a city and represents a new way to 
deliver content that is targeted to a mobile user’s activity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dai Nippon Printing Co., Ltd. ‘Media Technology Research 
Center’ and ‘Corporate R&amp;D Division’ sponsored this 
research. Ame Elliott participated in early fieldwork. Prof. 
Fumitoshi Kato and students of Keio University assisted
with street interviews. Pratik Rathod and Tian Luo 
developed the client context-sensing capabilities.
REFERENCES
1. Abowd, G., Atkeson, C., Hong, J., Long, S., Kooper, R., 
Pinkerton, M. Cyberguide: a mobile context-aware tour 
guide. Wirel. Netw. 3, 5 (1997), 421-433.
2. Adomavicius, G. &amp; Tuzhilin, A. Toward the next 
generation of recommender systems: A survey of the 
state-of-the-art and possible extensions. IEEE Trans. 
Knowledge and Data Eng. 17, 6 (2005), 734-749.
3. Ashbrook, D. &amp; Starner, T. 2003. Using GPS to learn 
significant locations and predict movement across 
multiple users. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 7, 5 
(2003), 275-286.
4. Asthana, A., Cravatts, M., Krzyzanouski, P. An indoor 
wireless system for personalized shopping assistance. In 
Cabrera, L. &amp; Sattyanarayanan, M. (Eds). Workshop on 
Mobile Computing Systems and Applications. IEEE CS 
Press, 1994, 69–74.
5. Baus, J., Cheverst, K., Kray, C. A survey of map-based 
mobile guides. In Zipf, A., Meng, L. &amp; Reichenbacher, 
T. (Eds). Map based mobile services - Theories, 
Methods and Implementations. Springer-Verlag, 2005.
6. Begole, J., Tang, J. C., Hill, R. Rhythm modeling, 
visualizations and applications. Proc. UIST&apos;03, ACM 
Press, 2003, 11-20.
7. Begole, J., Matsakis, N. E., and Tang, J. C. Lilsys: 
Sensing Unavailability. In Proc. CSCW &apos;04. ACM Press, 
2004, 511-514.
8. Brown, P and Jones, G., Context-aware Retrieval: 
Exploring a New Environment for Information Retrieval 
and Information Filtering, Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, (5) 4, Springer-Verlag, 2001, 253-263.
9. Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchell, K., Friday, A., &amp; 
Efstratiou, C. Developing a context-aware electronic 
tourist guide: some issues and experiences. Proc. 
CHI’00. ACM Press, New York, NY, 2000, 17-24.
10. Froehlich, J., Chen, M., Smith, I., Potter, F. Voting With 
Your Feet: An investigative study of the relationship 
between place visit behavior and preference. Proc. 
Ubicomp, 2006, 17-21.
11. Goldberg, D., Nichols, D., Oki, B. M., and Terry, D. 
1992. Using collaborative filtering to weave an 
information tapestry. Commun. ACM 35, 12 (Dec. 
1992), 61-70.
12. Harada, M. Japan. In Cushman, G. &amp; Veal, A. (Eds). 
Free time and leisure participation: International 
Perspectives. CABI Publishing, 2006.
13. Hazas, M. Scott, J. &amp; Krumm, J. Location-aware 
computing comes of age. IEEE Computer, 37, 2, 2004, 
95-97.
1165
