CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
business hours and location. The metadata were extracted 
using finite-state-based entity finders and perl scripts.
Data Context Detection
In addition to detecting the user’s physical context, Magitti 
detects the context of the user relative to personal data from 
the device. Magitti includes a Content Analysis module 
that analyzes the content of calendar appointments, viewed 
documents, and messages to extract information about the 
user’s plans. The fieldwork results indicated that people 
often discuss leisure activity plans with friends using 
mobile email and Short Message Service (SMS). To test the 
potential usefulness of this source of information, we 
examined the content of a corpus of approximately 10,000 
SMS messages generated by students at the National 
University of Singapore, similar to the Magitti target 
demographic [15]. Approximately 11% of the messages in 
the corpus contain information related to leisure activities. 
Our prototype Content Analysis module currently targets 
only Eat and See activity planning, with other activities 
planned for future work. Figure 6 shows an example 
message along with the extracted information. The 
extracted information is used by the Activity Model to infer 
the probability of the user’s interest in activities at current 
or future times.
xy:tomorrow what time you be in school? think me and 
shuhui meeting in school around 4. then duno still can 
see movie or not because duno if a rest want meet for 
dinner. how?
ACTCAT=MOVIE, EAT :: ACTTIME=2007/05/26 16:00 :: 
UNCERTAINTY=10 minutes :: TENSE=FUTURE
Figure 6. Example SMS message and extracted activity- 
related information.
FIELD EVALUATION
After the majority of Magitti’s features were implemented, 
we conducted a field evaluation to learn how people would 
use Magitti in a real world context. Here, we report on our 
findings regarding Magitti’s three primary characteristics, 
namely supporting serendipitous discovery of leisure 
activity, predicting user activity, and offering context-aware 
recommendations.
Eleven volunteers went out with Magitti in the Palo Alto, 
California area between one and four times each over 
several days. They visited a total of 60 places over 32 
outings, averaging 1.9 places per outing. About half the 
outings (16) were accompanied by a family member or 
friend. Participants, who were company employees not 
working on the project, ranged in age from mid-20s to late- 
50s, and averaged 37. A further evaluation with Japanese 
youth is planned, but we felt that an initial study was 
warranted and would also allow us to identify usability 
issues, some of which are reported below.
We interviewed each participant about their leisure time 
and how they typically get recommendations, and then gave
them a demonstration of Magitti. After each outing, 
participants filled out a questionnaire about their activities. 
In addition, we logged all their Magitti actions and 
collected map traces of outings. An experimenter 
accompanied each participant on one of their outings to 
observe their use of the system. Finally, we interviewed 
each participant after they completed all their outings.
Supporting Serendipity
Most people told us they usually go to the same few places, 
particularly restaurants, and only occasionally try a new one 
because of the difficulty of finding good recommendations. 
These comments echoed those in our Japanese field studies. 
While using Magitti, however, they were very successful at 
discovering new places. Over half the places they visited 
(53%) were new to them, including 38% that they had 
never heard of and 15% they had heard of but never been 
to. The rest they had been to once or twice (25%) 
(sometimes long ago) or many times (23%). In 67% of the 
outings, they visited at least one place that was new to 
them. Also, during 69% of the outings, people noticed 
unfamiliar places that they planned to visit in the future.
People expressed delight at finding new places in areas they 
had been to many times before. Upon finding a new 
restaurant, one person said, “Cool! I like that. I would never 
have found that place if it wasn&apos;t for this.” One woman 
found a new restaurant in the downtown near her home and 
explained this was a nice contrast, since “we usually spend 
30 minutes walking up and down the street looking at 
places we&apos;ve seen a million times before, and always going 
to ones we know.” One long-time resident said, “I think it 
makes life more interesting. It allows you to get out of your 
daily routine, almost as ifyou’re going to a different city.”
Overall, people were particularly enthusiastic about this 
aspect of Magitti, namely its effectiveness in helping them 
discover new places to go. When asked to rate Magitti’s 
overall usefulness, they rated it 4.1 on a scale of 1-5 
(5=very helpful). This reassured us that Magitti would be 
useful for residents and not just tourists or newcomers.
Predicting User Activity
We encouraged users to try different activity types, but the 
most common activities were in the Eat and Buy categories 
(consistent with population patterns from our fieldwork and 
[17]). They visited 30 places to Eat, 27 to Buy, and 3 to 
Do. Participants were also asked to rate items and to enter 
preferences to improve the quality of the recommendations. 
Still, with relatively few outings per person, Magitti’s 
recommendations were not as customized as they would be 
after more consistent use. In addition, some of the models 
that inform its recommendations were not available when 
we ran the study, so the findings from this evaluation 
represent a conservative estimate of its usefulness.
Magitti started up in “Any” mode, meaning the number of 
recommendations of each activity type reflected its 
prediction of the user’s interests at that time and place. In
1163
