CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 3. Magitti architecture.
Content
Restaurant Reviews
Store Descriptions
Parks Descriptions
Movie Listings
Museum Events
Magazine Articles
...
Context Sensing
Physkal Context	Data Context
Location	Viewed docs/apps
Time	Calendar
Weather	Emails sent/rcvdsent/rcvd
User input
Personalized
Activity-related
Recommendations
ctivityActivity PredictionsPredictions
Mobile
User 
Use
I nterface
Figure 2: Main Screen with partial map view (left) and 
Main Screen marking menu (right).
To locate recommended items on the Main Screen, users 
can pull out the Map tab to see a partial map (Figure 2, 
left), which shows the four items currently visible in the 
list. A second tap slides the map out to full screen.
The minimal size and one-handed operation requirements 
have a clear impact on the UI. As can be seen from Figures 
1 and 2, large buttons dominate the screen to enable the 
user to operate Magitti with a thumb [26] while holding the 
device in one hand. Our design utilizes marking menus [19] 
on touch screens to operate the interface, as shown in the 
right side of Figure 2. The user taps on an item and holds 
for 400ms to view the menu; then drags her thumb from the 
center X and releases over the menu item. As the user 
learns commands and their gestures, she can simply sweep 
her thumb in that direction without waiting for the menu to 
appear. Over time, she learns to operate the device without 
the menus, although they are available whenever needed.
Menu buttons at the bottom of the Main Screen allow the 
user to adjust the recommendation list if needed. By 
default, the system is in “Any” mode, meaning it will offer 
recommendations based on its predictions about the 
likelihood of each of the five modes of user activity; Eat, 
Buy, See, Do, or Read. But users can ask to see 
recommendations from just one category (and in so doing, 
informing the device of their activity interests, thus 
providing data for learning). Users can also ask for 
recommendations within a certain distance or time range. 
For planning purposes, they can ask for items in another 
location and/or at another time. Additionally, users can 
indicate their general preferences for cuisines, shops, 
activities, and events, which influence the types of 
recommendations offered. Users can also specify 
preferences for attributes of places, such as price range, 
noise level, availability of parking, smoking, and so on. 
And, finally, they can bookmark recommended items and 
perform keyword searches.
System Architecture
Figure 3 is a basic representation of Magitti’s overall client- 
server architecture. The mobile client UI runs on a handheld
device1 that provides data for the Context Sensing Module. 
This module gathers data about the user’s physical context 
(GPS, time of day, user inputs, weather) and data context 
(content of emails sent/received, calendar, web pages and 
documents viewed, applications used). The text in the 
users’ data context is analyzed for information about their 
tastes and preferences as well as current and planned 
activities. The context data are sent to the Activity 
Prediction module and to the Recommender module.
A defining characteristic of Magitti is the chaining of 
predictions to filter information to the user’s likely current 
interests. Magitti first predicts the probability of the user 
being engaged in any of five activity modes during a 
specified period of time. The default is now plus two 
hours. The probability distribution determines the number 
of slots to use for activity-related information in the 
interface, as illustrated in Figure 4. Second, Magitti predicts 
the user’s interest in particular pieces of content for each 
activity mode using a combination of recommendation 
models. The two prediction modules are described next.
Activity Prediction Module
Activity probability prediction is based on a combination of 
patterns observed across the user’s demographic population 
and individual behavior pattern. The population patterns 
were derived from the data collected on Magitti’s target 
demographic in our fieldwork and from a Japanese Survey 
on Time Use and Leisure Activities [17]. Individual user 
behavior models are learned over time by associating each 
venue in Magitti’s database with one of the five activity 
modes that were observed in our fieldwork, and modeling 
the frequency of each mode by tracking user behavior. For 
example, if a user visits a retail store, the system records 
that as being in the Buy activity mode; similarly for visiting 
a restaurant or café, (Eat), theater or museum (See), gym or 
park (Do), and reading of content on Magitti itself (Read). 
These recorded location visits create models of the user’s 
individual activity behavior and preferences (e.g., cuisine
1 We used a Mio A701 model with touch-screen, GPS, 
WiFi, running Windows Mobile OS.
1161
