CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Activity-Based Serendipitous Recommendations
with the Magitti Mobile Leisure Guide
Victoria Bellotti, Bo Begole, Ed H. Chi, Nicolas Ducheneaut, Ji Fang,
Ellen Isaacs, Tracy King, Mark W. Newman, Kurt Partridge, Bob Price,
Paul Rasmussen, Michael Roberts, Diane J. Schiano, Alan Walendowski
Palo Alto Research Center
3333 Coyote Hill Road, Palo Alto, CA
magitti@parc.com
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a context-aware mobile recommender 
system, codenamed Magitti. Magitti is unique in that it 
infers user activity from context and patterns of user 
behavior and, without its user having to issue a query, 
automatically generates recommendations for content 
matching. Extensive field studies of leisure time practices 
in an urban setting (Tokyo) motivated the idea, shaped the 
details of its design and provided data describing typical 
behavior patterns. The paper describes the fieldwork, user 
interface, system components and functionality, and an 
evaluation of the Magitti prototype.
Author Keywords
Field studies, user experience design, interaction, context- 
aware computing, mobile recommendation systems, leisure.
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
Finding out what’s going on in a city has traditionally been 
supported by city guides such as “Time Out” in London and 
New York, and “Tokyo Walker” in Tokyo. These 
publications are gradually being displaced by electronic 
media; most recently by location-based services [29], which 
allow users to search for local restaurants, movies, stores 
and so on by entering a query. An alternative user 
experience, perhaps more in keeping with leisure, is 
serendipitous, activity-based discovery of activities and 
venues, made possible by advances in context-aware 
computing and machine learning.
This paper introduces a system code-named Magitti; an
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00. 
activity-centered mobile leisure-time guide. Magitti delivers 
timely and personally relevant recommendations about 
nearby venues for pursuing activities in an urban 
environment. Unlike other guides, it is not designed for 
tourists, but for young urbanites interested in all kinds of 
leisure activities, emphasizing spontaneity rather than 
sightseeing. Magitti is also unique in using machine 
learning techniques to make a chain of predictions that 
target information to user interests. It first predicts ongoing 
and future activity based on the user’s context and models 
of past behavior, and then predicts what information will be 
most useful within the predicted activity based on user 
preferences.
In this paper, we first review extensive field work that 
informed the design of Magitti. We then introduce Magitti 
along with related work in context-aware and guide 
systems. We provide an overview of the system and its user 
interface, and present findings from a user evaluation.
CONCEPTUALIZING MAGITTI
The Magitti project was a sponsored research engagement 
with Dai Nippon Printing Co., Ltd. (DNP), one of Japan’s 
largest printing companies. DNP wishes to develop a 
service to replace printed city guides. To address that wish, 
we created a novel system that detects current user context, 
infers likely current and future leisure activities and 
recommends content about suitable venues (e.g., stores, 
restaurants, parks, movies.). The target demographic is 19- 
25-year-olds who go out more than most and quickly adopt 
new technologies. The target locations are Japanese cities 
that have so many venues that few people are familiar with 
more than a tiny fraction of them.
Designing such a system necessitated learning about the 
practices, problems, and needs of the prospective user 
category, urban Japanese young adults, and how they like to 
spend their leisure time. To this end, PARC researchers 
spent three two-week periods in Japan intensively gathering 
data, described next.
Understanding Leisure Time Priorities
There is a dearth of literature in English on the specifics of 
Japanese leisure time activities (but see [12, 24] for
1157
