CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
a joke (“wave to her or something”), and the crew “pretend 
[they] haven’t heard”, relying on plausible deniability. This 
plausible deniability can only be sustained for so long, 
however, due to the determined level of seriousness, and as 
such the crew must begin to consider stopping the ride. This 
strategy, however, carries with it a number of significant 
overheads. Stopping the ride or slowing it down just for one 
person obviously disrupts the experience for co-riders and 
requires intervention by the operators. In the end, the ride is 
slowed down, but not stopped, which appears to resolve the 
crisis.
{24} Rider: Are you okay? Ned are you okay you okay you 
okay? Ned are you okay? Look look it’s [inaudible] 
no... it’s okay
Operator S: She she says it’s okay she says it’s okay 
Operator A: Oh sorry Operator H she says it’s okay 
now she says it’s okay
Operator H: It’s okay now?
Operator A: Yes yeah [inaudible]
DISCUSSION: PERFORMING AMUSEMENT RIDES
We now reflect on our three vignettes, further illustrating 
them with quotes from post-event interviews, in order to 
reveal the ways in which our telemetry system transforms 
riding into a public performance and also to identify key 
challenges for the development of future systems.
Previous research in performance interfaces
In order to ground this discussion and to enable us to draw 
out more general lessons for HCI, we relate our 
observations to previous accounts of interactive 
performances from the literature.
There is a longstanding interest in HCI in interaction in 
public settings such as museums, galleries, artistic 
performances and even the city streets. Ethnographic 
studies of interactives in museums and galleries have 
revealed the public nature of interactions and highlighted 
the roles of co-visitors and spectators [16]. Other studies of 
interactive performances have highlighted the importance 
of orchestration practices in shaping a live experience, 
including the ways in which technical crew monitor and 
intervene in an experience from behind the scenes [6, 8].
Studies such as these have inspired more general design 
frameworks for performance interfaces. In particular, [13] 
has discussed the relationship between the primary users of 
an interface, called performers, and nearby spectators, 
showing how different approaches to revealing or hiding 
performers’ manipulations of an interface and their 
consequent effects might lead to experiences that can be 
considered to be ‘expressive’, ‘secretive’, ‘magical’ or 
‘suspenseful’. A second framework has considered how a 
performance is framed, further dividing spectators into two 
categories, audience members who are inside the 
performance frame and therefore aware of the nature of the 
performance versus bystanders who remain outside the 
frame and so may be unwitting observers [2]. Drawing on
this existing body of work, we now consider how our F:TL 
performance can be described in terms of the relationships 
between the three roles of performer, spectator (who may 
be further subdivided into audience and bystanders) and 
orchestrator (spanning a diverse range of sub-roles).
Reconnecting performers, spectators and orchestrators 
In F:TL, the performers are the riders who wear the 
telemetry system, whereas the spectators are those who 
observe them. These spectators can indeed be divided into 
an audience who have purchased tickets for the event and 
who gather in the main auditorium to view the telemetry 
output, versus bystanders who may observe the ride outside 
but without seeing the telemetry. Finally, there is an 
extensive crew of orchestrators including the ride operator, 
the various technicians who manage the telemetry system, 
and the host and other ‘front of house’ staff. We now 
discuss how our telemetry system changes the nature of 
each role and perturbs the relationships between them.
From spectator to audience. As intended, our telemetry 
system transforms the experience of watching the ride, 
creating an audience who were observed to engage with the 
host and respond to events shown by the telemetry, for 
example by clapping and laughing (e.g., vignette fragments 
{1,2,5,8}). In post-event interviews, audience members 
reported enjoying riders’ audio and video commentaries as 
this conveyed “how they behave and how they react” but 
also the telemetry data as this gave a glimpse into “what’s 
happening within them”. They noted that the telemetry 
system offered a level of detail that was not available when 
directly observing the ride due to its scale and speed:
“when you’re near the ride and watching it, you can’t 
obviously see people’s reactions. ... You can only see that 
they’re screaming, but, as there are four people on each car, 
you don’t even know who’s screaming ... its just like there’s 
a screaming seat, four seats, coming past, and you don’t know 
who’s screaming.”
However, feedback also noted that the system could not 
replace the physicality of being next to the actual ride itself:
“There’s still the queue, there’s the noise of the engine going, 
of the machine, which I remember from the first one made 
this incredible kind of noise, it sounded quite interesting, 
there’s the queue, the lights ... the experience”
In short the telemetry system can enhance, but not replace, 
the experience of observing the ride.
From rider to performer. The introduction of the 
telemetry system radically transformed the experience of 
riding. There was a clear, almost universal, tendency for 
riders to consciously perform, commentating on their 
experience for the benefit of the watching audience 
{4,5,16}. This urge to perform may be a natural tendency or 
may have been learned from the initial demonstration by 
the professional rider. It may also be a way of reducing 
anxiety for some riders as noted by one interviewee:
1173
