CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
“I was doing things that I was not aware of. I was swearing, 
for example, and um ... I did it unconsciously, I don’t 
remember doing it, you know”.
A similar issue can be seen in our third vignette in which a 
rider pleads for the ride to be stopped over what is 
potentially a public channel. People are often scared on 
amusement rides (after all, this is part of the point of the 
experience to a degree) and may want the ride to stop. 
While operators do of course monitor for critical incidents 
and could stop the ride if necessary, the lack of a clear 
backchannel from riders gives them the latitude to choose 
not to so do if they judge based on their experience that the 
situation is normal, for example that a rider is ‘routinely’ 
scared and will probably soon improve, or that stopping or 
slowing the ride would make matters worse (as this could 
be a long process), would destroy the experience for others, 
or might ultimately embarrass the individual more through 
the public humiliation of being removed from the ride. In 
other words, there is a degree of ambiguity in the traditional 
set-up that allows operators to choose ‘not to see’ scared 
riders if they feel this would be beneficial. This is 
reminiscent of Aoki and Woodruff’s discussion of the 
potentially useful role of ambiguity in ‘saving face’ in 
personal communications when using mobile phones [1].
Our telemetry system however, closes down this ambiguity, 
as riders are now aware that operators should be hearing 
them and may be more inclined to feel that they are being 
ignored. The situation is further complicated by the 
presence of spectators who may also be party to the rider’s 
requests over a public channel (perhaps luckily in vignette 3 
they were not as the public telemetry display did not 
broadcast audio during the later stages of the event). This 
has the potential to further embarrass riders, to make it even 
more difficult for operators to exercise their judgement, 
potentially facing a severe ethical dilemma, for example in 
the case of a real medical emergency on the ride. Finally, 
broadcasting this type of information might potentially 
reduce spectators’ motivation to try the ride for themselves.
In short, our technology is perturbing what is a subtle 
balance of awareness and communication among the three 
roles of performer, spectator and orchestrator, potentially 
closing down some useful ambiguity in what is after all an 
edgy experience in which many people will feel scared for a 
while, but may ultimately feel relieved or even proud for 
having seen it through. This implies a degree of selection 
and editorial control over the use of the telemetry data. The 
big question here is how should this be done? Should both 
riders and orchestrators have the ability to switch off the 
public broadcast? Should users be able to vet and approve 
their videos after the event, but losing the element of 
liveness? Or should we further differentiate between 
spectators, for example transmitting the live telemetry only 
to the mobile phones of selected friends and family? These 
questions remain open for further exploration.
Implications for research on spectator interfaces
More generally, our study speaks to recent design 
frameworks for spectator interfaces. Building on [2], we 
argue that interactive performance involves a balance 
between three broad roles: performers, spectators and 
orchestrators, each of which may be further specialised and 
subdivided. Our study is novel because it introduces a new 
performance technology into an established situation, 
highlighting the way in which an existing balance of 
relationships between these roles is perturbed. Our study 
also suggests that while it may be useful to reason about 
how spectators experience performers’ interactions in terms 
of revealing or hiding manipulations and effects as 
proposed in [13], that this is not a complete view. Instead, 
we also need to consider how orchestrators experience 
performers’ interactions and beyond this, consider more 
selective revealing or hiding or interactions at different 
times or to different classes of spectator. Finally, we 
observe that a degree of ambiguity about who can observe 
what may support the subtleties of orchestration and for 
saving face in difficult circumstances.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In conclusion, we suggest that personal telemetry systems 
attached to spectator interfaces have the potential to 
significantly enhance amusement rides. We have seen that 
our prototype can provide an engaging experience for 
spectators, especially when compared to their traditional 
role of ‘holding the bags’. Beyond this, our study suggests 
that telemetry systems can also enhance the experience of 
riding and even operating a ride, providing that they are 
sensitively designed and deployed to avoid embarrassment 
and leave sufficient latitude for operational control. Key to 
this is recognising and supporting the bi-modal nature of 
riders’ performances, moving between moments of lucid 
commentary and less restrained flow, and also respecting 
some of the subtleties inherent in deciding when riders are 
‘normally’ scared compared to when there is an unusual 
situation that requires action. If these challenges can be met 
then we believe that telemetry systems may help restore 
some of the traditional ‘old school’ ride showmanship that 
may have been lost in the scaling up to today’s massive 
high-intensity rides. From an HCI point of view, our study 
adds to the growing corpus of literature on spectator and 
public interfaces, showing how designers need to consider 
the balance of relationships between performers, spectators 
and orchestrators, and how introducing a new interactive 
technology can perturb these in subtle ways. Key here is the 
requirement to selectively reveal aspects of a performer’s 
experience to different kinds of spectator.
We conclude by noting some directions for future work. A 
major challenge lies in scaling up the approach to work 
within high-throughput environments such as theme parks 
which raises several questions. Should the technology 
(cameras, microphones, sensors and communications) be 
embedded into the ride in order to avoid delays in donning 
and removing equipment and improve reliability? Or should
1175
