CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
speakers. During transmission, experts were at hand who 
introduced the data to help the audience make sense of it 
and ‘calibrate’ their expectations.
EXPERIENCING THRILL
To explore the impact of introducing wearable telemetry 
technology on riders, spectators and ride operators, we 
concentrate on three vignettes drawn from a larger corpus 
of data. This data consists of: eighteen sets of telemetry 
data including video recordings captured by helmet 
mounted cameras worn by the riders, along with 
corresponding log files of accelerometer and heart rate data 
captured for each; approximately fifteen hours of video 
recordings by a handheld camera following participants and 
team members; and supporting design documents and notes. 
These vignettes have emerged from an analysis process 
which involved the transcription and discussion of multiple 
fragments in a series of ‘data sessions’, during which our 
key themes emerged. These themes were also followed-up 
through five semi-structured phone interviews with riders. 
Two further semi-structured interviews with ride operators 
at the events were also conducted. Ultimately, we selected 
these three vignettes as being representative of the most 
compelling issues that we uncovered. Some appreciation of 
the spatial and organisational set-up of spectators, operators 
and riders and their lines of communication is critical for 
understanding the vignettes. The following therefore 
provides a brief overview. Overall the event was staged 
across multiple spaces inside and outside the venue, while we 
concentrate here on those spaces that are directly necessary 
for our discussion.
The main auditorium (2nd floor). Here, data transmitted 
from a single rider sitting on the ride outside was visualised 
and discussed. This process was guided by a number of event 
hosts, who ensured that each group of roughly 90 spectators 
had good access to this information. In addition, the main 
telemetry control room was set up on one side in the same 
space, physically overlooking the ride outside. From here, 
technical operators ensured the availability of the live data 
streams at the right times during the event.
On the ride. On the ride, set up outside approximately 40m 
away from the auditorium, riders went through the roughly 
two minute long ride program. As part of the telemetry 
equipment, the rider had a one-way audio link to the control 
room, which was sometimes (but not always) broadcast to 
the audience in the auditorium. This audio stream was 
controlled by event staff, who responded to requests from 
event hosts.
Outside in front of the ride (ground floor). From here, the 
ride operator controlled the speed, direction and duration of 
the ride, as instructed by a telemetry operator, who was in 
two-way radio contact with the control room upstairs. At the 
right times during the event, the telemetry data, operation of 
the ride and verbal commentary by the rider were 
coordinated via this link.
The following three vignettes, taken from the final event, 
highlight the experiences of different kinds of participant in 
the event. The first follows a ‘professional rider’, a member 
of the production team who gave an initial public 
demonstration at the start of the event. The second follows 
the relatively routine experience of Sam, a member of the 
public audience who became a rider by virtue of winning 
the ticket-lottery. In contrast, the third focuses on the 
activities of the technical operators as they decide how to 
deal with a moment of crisis in which a public rider appears 
to be in difficulty.
Vignette 1: Alan – the professional rider
Our opening sequence begins with Alan&apos;, our professional 
rider, waiting on the ride outside having already been 
presented to the audience downstairs. The audience is 
getting seated in the main auditorium. Two of the operators 
are outside on the main platform of the Booster ride. Two 
more operators are in the control area in the auditorium and 
are in radio contact with one of the operators on the ground. 
As the audience settles, a host at the front of the room 
provides a very brief introduction for the audience, 
introducing Trevor, an expert in the sensing technology 
whose role it is to explain its operation and the nature of the 
visualisations.
{1} Host: Come and sit down. Mentally fasten your 
seatbelts [ ... ] we’re gonna go straight to Trevor 
[gestures towards main projection, which at this point 
switches to the visualisation]. Telemetry, what is it? 
[Faces Trevor who	enters]	Trevor.	[Host
claps][Audience claps]
Once standing by the projection, Trevor goes on to describe 
the individual components of the visualization.
{2} Trevor: [ ... ] On the ECG [pointing at the ECG display 
again] we see the peak [flattens hand and raises 
further into air] when the heart is beat, we analyse it 
and calculate [points at heart rate display at bottom] 
the heart rate. We see Alan is still... [moves hand 
horizontally] sitting there and waiting so his heart 
rate is not big [inaudible] 70 or [inaudible] we see it 
changes all the time [waves left hand along the heart 
rate line] it’s very variable. [ ... ]
Trevor’s conduct at the projection highlights how variable 
the visualisation is and thus how to make sense of and 
‘read’ what is a ‘reasonable’ or ‘expected’ level of 
variability in heart rate, ECG and so on. As his description 
comes to a close, Brian, another host, who is at the back of 
the room begins speaking.
{3} Brian: I think... we’ll see we’ll umm I’ll cut to Alan 
now and see what he’s got to say just before we 
started the ride. [Beeping radio sound, Brian talks 
into radio] Right Tim could you get Alan to start 
speaking please?
Alan is silent for approximately three seconds during which 
time the ride starts moving relatively slowly.
&apos; All names have been changed for anonymity
1169
