CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Performing Thrill: Designing Telemetry Systems
and Spectator Interfaces for Amusement Rides
Holger Schnädelbach 1, Stefan Rennick Egglestone 1, Stuart Reeves 1,
Steve Benford 1, Brendan Walker 2 and Michael Wright 1
1 Mixed Reality Laboratory	2 Aerial
University of Nottingham	42 Murchison Road
Computer Science	London
Wollaton Road, Nottingham, NG8 11313, UK	E10 6NB, UK
{hms,sre,str,sdb,maw}@cs.nott.ac.uk	info@aerial.fm
ABSTRACT
Fairground: Thrill Laboratory was a series of live events 
that augmented the experience of amusement rides. A 
wearable telemetry system captured video, audio, heart-rate 
and acceleration data, streaming them live to spectator 
interfaces and a watching audience. In this paper, we 
present a study of this event, which draws on video 
recordings and post-event interviews, and which highlights 
the experiences of riders, spectators and ride operators. Our 
study shows how the telemetry system transformed riders 
into performers, spectators into an audience, and how the 
role of ride operator began to include aspects of 
orchestration, with the relationship between all three roles 
also transformed. Critically, the introduction of a telemetry 
system seems to have had the potential to re-connect 
riders/performers back to operators/orchestrators and 
spectators/audience, re-introducing a closer relationship that 
used to be available with smaller rides. Introducing 
telemetry to a real-world situation also creates significant 
complexity, which we illustrate by focussing on a moment 
of perceived crisis.
Author Keywords
Performance, theme-park, amusement, fairground, 
telemetry, biosensing, spectator interface, wearable 
computing, heart rate, orchestration.
ACM Classification Keywords
H1.2 User/Machine Systems; H5. Information Interfaces 
and Presentation.
INTRODUCTION
The amusement park, spanning the theme park and the 
fairground, is an historic form of entertainment that has 
driven the development of entertainment technologies for
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
many years, from the first manually operated roundabouts 
or ‘dobbies’, to today’s virtual reality simulations and 
extreme roller coasters [15]. Computers are now routinely 
used to design amusement rides, control their operation 
[18], enable a rider’s interaction and immersion [12], and 
increasingly to document their experience by automatically 
producing still images or even videos as souvenirs.
One of the most challenging problems facing modern 
amusement parks today is that of spectators: accompanying 
visitors, often the adults in a party, who are unable or 
unwilling to go on the rides, but who nevertheless have to 
spend a day at the park. These visitors are often left 
‘holding the bags’. Given that they are often also the ones 
who hold the purse strings, it is important to consider how 
their experience might be improved. Inspired in part by the 
increasing use of telemetry in sports such as motor racing 
[5], our approach to this problem is to use a personal 
wearable telemetry system to capture a rider’s experience 
and broadcast it to spectators so that they can get a greater 
sense of what it might be like to ride and can more closely 
share in the reactions of friends and family. Such a system 
also has the potential to extend the images (and in some 
places videos) that are now being sold as ride souvenirs.
HCI research has also begun to focus on the spectator. As 
interfaces have moved into public settings such as 
museums, galleries, clubs, performances and the city 
streets, it has become increasingly important to consider 
how interaction with computers operates as a public affair. 
Inspired by ethnographic studies of interaction in such 
settings [6,7,8,16], researchers have proposed new 
approaches to designing interaction with spectators in mind, 
for example choosing to reveal or hide the manipulations of 
an interface and their consequent effects [13], or by 
considering how to frame interaction in the public arena [2]. 
This paper reports on a deliberate attempt to create such a 
spectator interface and our study is therefore relevant to this 
emerging discussion in HCI as we address later on.
Our approach has involved the rapid development and 
public deployment of a wearable telemetry system along 
with a qualitative study – involving video recordings and 
follow up interviews – in which we have developed an
1167
