CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
routines and those around him. As an example he would 
walk a particular path everyday to take his children to 
school. At that particular time of day it was busy and there 
was lots of traffic noise and so he had stopped appreciating 
it. But when he read comments left by some geocachers 
about a cache local to him, remarking what a beautiful and 
tranquil area it was, it made him reflect on it and look at his 
local area in a different way.
Collecting
As an activity, geocaching was more than just the sum of the 
individual caching experiences. For many of the 
participants, there was a “collecting” ethos that was a 
significant part of the experience. The geocaching web site 
keeps a record of all the different caches a particular cacher 
or caching team have done. Their “collection” of cache finds 
as a whole was a demonstrable record of what they have 
achieved. Building this up was an important and ongoing 
driver for continued participation. Participants mentioned 
that they would not want to give this up visible sense of 
achievement. In this respect we cannot look for 
motivational and behavioural factors simply within the 
context of an isolated geocache experience. The 
significance and meaning of the next cache is dependent 
upon the context of what they have already collected and 
achieved.
While in some senses this motivation might be regarded as 
rather trivial it had important behavioural consequences. As 
with other kinds of collecting behaviour [15, 18], 
participants set particular goals to achieve For example:
“We set our own goal to try and do every cache within the first 
page where you log in – the places where you live. These are all 
the caches – by gradually extending radius – we try and do every 
single cache on that page. That changes as caches, either new ones 
are inserted or old ones are suspended. I think Alex set that. We 
did manage to do it last year but we are behind now again.”
What is important here was not simply that people set these 
goals but that these goals became an extra incentive and 
driver to continued and more frequent participation. As we 
can see from the following quotes these goals created a 
sense of urgency to get out there and do more caching. 
Completing the goals created a sense of achievement
“We have been aiming to get to our 100th in a year of caching – 
which meant rather a lot in March... ’cause we had fallen 
behind... It was an achievable goal. We were fairly close to it. 
Let’s see if we can get the 100 in–and it forces you. If you becomes 
a bit lethargic and can’t be bothered, if you have a goal like that 
you think well maybe 3 or 4 this weekend and I’ll be alright.”
“For me it’s a bit like a mine field. It’s like minesweeping. I like to 
clear the 5Km area around me of all geocaches and that’s my 
weird way of doing it. If someone releases a new one within 5 km I 
have to go out and do it straight away.”
Others would celebrate particular milestones such as 50th, 
100th, 200th etc. and would do something special for these:
“People seem to mark their 100th 200th etc for whatever it is. They 
say I think I’ll pick a good one for my 100th. One that looks like a 
real challenge.”
This particular motivation of collecting was important
because there were times when the experience became about 
the numbers. It was quite typical for people to do multiple 
caches in a day and some of the keen participants would be 
disappointed with less than 10 finds on a caching daytrip.
Profile and statistics 
Part of the value of these collecting practices within 
geocaching comes from being immersed within the social 
context of the geocaching community. As discussed in the 
social psychology literature on collecting, a person’s 
collection becomes bound up with doing identity work [15]. 
Consequently, there was value not simply in these collecting 
achievements per se but how they came to be represented to 
others. With this in mind, it is important to consider the 
ways this was enabled through the on-line environment and 
how this inextricably tied the location-based experience 
with accompanying on-line behaviour.
Basic logging capabilities are available to all members of 
the geocaching.com web site. These essentially document 
all the caches that a user finds and owns, differentiating 
them according cache type. For some of the participants in 
the study, these basic capabilities were a sufficient 
representation of their activities and did not require any 
investment of effort to achieve this value. For others, 
though, the presentation of their profile was an important 
concern for them. These participants would exploit 
additional capabilities of premium membership and other 
third party software to introduce further statistical 
representations of their activity into their profiles. For 
example, they would include maps of counties they had 
cached in, number of “5-5” rated caches (for terrain 
difficulty and puzzle difficulty), days since last find, rate of 
finds. Some participants also posted photographs of their 
caching activities on their profile. As identity resources, 
these became another source of engagement for the 
participants.
In some senses these profiles had important functional 
value. Participants used them on a regular basis to interpret 
comments posted in the cache logs. Consider, for example, 
“Did not find” was a common comment within the cache 
logs. From a prospective cacher’s perspective it was 
important to be able to interpret these DNF comments to 
make a judgment about whether to go to a particular cache 
or not. Participants used information in the profiles to assess 
the level of experience of a comment author to know 
whether it was serious or not. Or they would use it to glean 
any clues about a cache owner that might help them solve 
clues to a particular puzzle cache.
“If someone goes to a cache and says they can’t find it or says its 
lost then you – and I want to do that one because it is one my route 
– you look at their profile and if it says 500 caches found its pretty 
certain its not there. If they have only found 10 you think they are 
not into it and it’s a bit harder to find that others. That’s the 
reason I look at their profile. Or to see what their job is – if they 
have a puzzle cache you look at their job to see what inspired them 
to work out that blasted puzzle.”
But many participants also inspected these profiles for less 
functional purposes, simply out of curiosity.
1181
