CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
real systematic study of the motivations and factors that 
influence it as an everyday practice as we have seen in this 
study. The study has highlighted some of these motivations. 
It has also shown how a dedicated forum for “publishing” 
these creations can be an important influence on behaviour. 
A good example of this is how placing caches in this forum 
provided a socially accountable way for a person to tag a 
place as important to them.
This begins to point to another important issue in 
understanding geocaching practices, namely the relationship 
between on-line and in situ behaviours. What the study has 
demonstrated is that such practices are intimately bound up 
together and that on-line participation can be a significant 
influence on associated location-based experiences and vice 
versa. There are number of issues to note here. First and 
perhaps most significant, is how the on-line technology and 
community it supports provide a social context within which 
these activities take place which motivate and shape 
ongoing participation. For example: the log responses to 
caches can motivate creation of caches; the friendly rivalry 
between participants can create an urgency to get out there; 
the social accountability of moving travel bugs on creates 
further urgency to get out there. All of these things and 
others emerge from the social context of these location- 
based activities provided by the on-line communities. This 
is a worthy consideration for designers of other location- 
based experiences. The on-line aspects of the experience 
also provide participants with what we might call in between 
participation. That is it provides more convenient touch 
points into the activity in between the in situ experiences 
that maintain a person’s participation even when not 
possible to get out to so the in situ parts of the experiences.
Geocaching is also significant in demonstrating an 
interesting alternative perspective on location-based and 
context aware activities. In some traditional views of 
location and context aware computing, the idea is that the 
technology simply responds to wherever you are. In this 
sense there is a fundamental notion of opportunism 
associated with the technology. But what is demonstrated in 
geocaching is that people are also planful about location- 
based experiences, planning to go somewhere because there 
is a location-based experience there. This is an important 
distinction from a design perspective because it emphasises 
the need to consider not just the location-based experience 
itself but also how to support the particular practices 
associated with planning to go to these places. Some good 
geocaching specific examples of this were visualisation 
tools to help people see the location of visual clusters of 
caches and also the context pages for each cache on the web 
site that encourage people to go in the first place.
In sum, the study has shown the importance of looking 
beyond the simple in situ consumption of a “treasure hunt”. 
Rather it is important to consider it as an ongoing practice 
that acquires social significance through its positioning 
within an on-line community. In addition, it is important to 
consider creation activities as well as consumption. We 
hope this perspective provides more general insight into the 
understanding and design of location-based experiences.
REFERENCES
1. Brown, B., MacColl, I., Chalmers, M., Galani, A., Randell, C. 
and Steed, A. (2003) Lessons from the Lighthouse: 
Collaboration in a shared mixed reality system. In 
Proceedings of CHI ’03, Ft Lauderdale, USA.
2. Benford, S., Crabtree, A. Flintham, M. Drozd, A., Anastasi, 
R., Paxton, M. Tandavanitj, N., Adams, M. and Row-Farr, J. 
(2006) Can You See Me Now? In Proceedings of CHI ’06, 
Montreal, Canada.
3. Chavez, D.J., Courtright, R., and Schneider, I. (2004) Over 
the river and through the woods. Parks &amp; Recreation, 39 (4), 
68-72.
4. Chavez, D.J., Schneider, I., and Powell, T. (2004). The social- 
psychology of a technology driven outdoor trend: Geocaching 
in the USA. In Proceedings of HICSS, 2004, Honolulu, HI.
5. Harper, R., Regan, T., and Rouncefield, M. (2006) Taking 
Hold of TV: Learning from the Literature. In Proceedings of 
OzCHI, Sydney, Australia,
6. http://www.createascape.org.uk
7. http://www.geocaching.com
8. http://www.mscapers.com
9. http://www.mobilebristol.com
10. http://www.yellowarrow.org
11. Hull, R., Clayton, B., Melamed, T. (2004) Rapid Authoring of 
Mediascapes. In Proceedings of UbiComp 2004, Nottingham, 
UK.
12. Hurd, A. R., &amp; Schlatter, B. E. (2005). Geocaching: 21st 
century hide-and-seek. The Journal of Physical Education, 
Recreation, and Dance, 76(7).
13. Kelley, M.A. (2006) Local Treasures: Geocaching across 
America. Santa Fe: Center for American Places.
14. Lane, G. (2003) Urban Tapestries: public authoring and social 
knowledge. In Proceedings of 1AD Conference on Appliance 
Design, Bristol, UK.
15. McIntosh, W. D. &amp; Schmeichel, B. (2004) Collectors and 
Collecting: A Social Psychological Perspective. Leisure 
Sciences 26: 85-97.
16. McGonical, J. (2007) Why I Love Bees: A Case Study in 
Collective Intelligence Gaming. 
http://www.avantgame.com/writings.htm
17. McNamara, J. (2004) Geocaching for Dummies. John Wiley 
and Sons.
18. O&apos;Hara, K., Kindberg, T., Glancy, M., Baptista, L. 
Sukumaran, B., Kahana, Gil. Rowbotham, J. (2007) Social 
Practices in Location-Based Collecting. In Proceedings of 
CHI &apos;07, San Jose, CA, USA
19. O&apos;Hara, K., Slayden Mitchell, A. and Vorbau, A. (2007) 
Consuming Video on Mobile Devices. In Proceedings of CHI 
&apos;07, San Jose, USA.
20. Palen, L., Salzman, M. and Youngs, E. (2000) Going wireless: 
behavior &amp; practice of new mobile phone users. In 
Proceedings of CSCW ’00, Philadelphia, USA.
21. Peters, J. (2004). The Complete Idiot&apos;s Guide to Geocaching. 
New York: Alpha Books.
22. Shermann, E. (2004) Geocaching: Hike and Seek with Your 
GPS. Apress.
23. Williams, M., Fleuriot, C., Reid, J., Hull, R., Facer, K. and 
Jones, O. (2002) Mobile Bristol: A New Sense Of Place. In: 
Proceedings of UbiComp 2002, Goteborg, Sweden.
24. Wright, T. (2003) Geocaching: Trees as treasure. In American 
Forests; 109, 2, p.7-9
1186
