CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
“Generally I find it fascinating to see. It’s nosiness really. The 
fact that you can click on their profile, see where they live and see 
how many they have done. I clicked on it because they have 
collected the item. I will click on it if they own an item or if it’s 
their cache. I guess because I only know one other person who 
does this it is intriguing to know who else does this.”
First to find: competition and urgency
We discussed earlier how the numbers game was an 
important driver for continued participation in geocaching 
activity. But there were other aspects of the activity which 
created compulsion and urgency among participants to get 
out there and search for a geocache. Again, such 
behavioural drivers lay outside the immediate bounds of the 
in situ cache experience itself. They arose because these 
experiences were performed within the context of the on-
line community. The most notable example discussed by 
participants was the practice of being “First-to-Find” a 
newly published cache and the particular kudos associated 
with this.
“A lot of people, their kudos is to be the first to find one. So when 
one is published you almost certainly know that it is going to be 
found within hours.”
When discussing this phenomenon with the participants, it 
was notable how the same two names cropped up again and 
again, namely Valiant Knight and Captain Gore-Tex. But 
what was interesting is how the dominance of these two 
cachers among the community actually generated a sense of 
friendly rivalry among the rest of the community. For most 
people, it was not a practical possible to regularly compete 
on first to finds. However it is something they wanted to do 
when the possibility of a “first-to-find” came up and was 
something that practically achievable for them. This would 
generate a huge drive to get out there and beat Valiant 
Knight or Captain Gore-Tex to the find.
“Or a new one pops up. That is the other thing that will draw you 
out – an email saying new. As soon as that is published, first-to-
find, lets get out there. It is a race then. There are some that is 
their goal in life: Valiant Knight and Gore-Tex. That is their thing, 
time and time again... So part of you just wants to beat them. Our 
first first-to-find was an absolute beauty. I had been in London 
working all day. I was on the train coming back and Fran said do 
you fancy doing a cache 7 o’clock at night – and I said no not 
really and he said well there is one out there that Gore-Tex has 
logged as can’t find and its near to Yatton station. So I got into the 
station at 8 o’clock and you drove there – and this is the madness 
of it – two cars at Yatton station. It’s dark and wet. I’ve done a 12 
hour day and haven’t eaten tea and I’m rummaging around in the 
hedgerow looking for a little film canister so that we can get first- 
to -find but it was more a case of so that we can be Captain Gore- 
Tex – and we took high delight in writing a log saying ‘I don’t 
know what you are talking about mate it’s there’ - it’s all in fun 
andjest.”
“When we first-to-find. The email went off as we were going out to 
a school play and it was on the Downs a few hundred yards from 
the front door. I couldn’t let Gore-Tex beat me to that one and then 
we went out. That was the closest to the geekiness I had got to 
going out to find the geocache with a torch. It was dark. It was 
8.15 in the winter.”
To make a detour while on the way to a school play in the 
middle of a dark winter’s evening is recognised by the
participant as slightly irrational and geeky. This particular 
participant was not an especially obsessive geocacher. But 
what is illustrated is just the level of compulsion that this 
friendly competition among the community can generate in 
terms of driving participation.
This desire also drove the emergence of related behaviours 
among participants such as increased monitoring of the site 
for new caches, subscription to email alerts for newly 
published caches and even the use of web enabled 
handhelds to obtain up to date information in the moment.
“Valiant Knight and Captain Gore-tex are a nightmare. He is like 
a First to Find junkie and this why I started the alerts off – will I 
get there before the Valiant Knight gets there.”
Challenge: individual and social aspects 
For many participants, one of the key driving factors for 
ongoing participation was that geocaching provided a 
number of sources of challenge.
“I mean it’s a terrific challenge to be able to find it. I suppose that 
is it – it’s a challenge. I don’t like to be beaten. The longest we 
have spent looking is about an hour and a half and I don’t like to 
give up until I have found it. ”
This is in line with the claims made in [18] about the 
location-based technologies providing value not simply by 
making it easy to get information at the right place and time 
but also by making it difficult. As we can see from the 
above quote, there was a sense that participants did not want 
to be beaten and will spend what on the face of it seems 
rather an irrational amount of time trying to locate the cache. 
But this gives a sense of the commitment to the challenge 
and level of motivation. Others spoke of how they would 
reluctantly give up on a particular occasion, but would often 
revisit the site again in an attempt to try again.
For the Puzzle Caches there was also the additional 
challenge of solving problems to discover the particular 
coordinates for the cache. What was significant about these 
puzzles was they required a large amount of time investment 
to solve them and much of this work occurs away from the 
cache site. Because of this distribution of the experience 
away from the actual cache location, participants would 
sometimes email the cache owners to confirm that they had 
correctly solved the puzzle before embarking on a long 
journey to actually find the cache. This extension of the 
experience beyond the cache site was also an important part 
of how people maintained participation in the activity even 
when not convenient to be out and about. For example, 
when weather conditions were not suitable for the outdoor 
aspects of a location-based experience.
“We tend to spend more time with puzzle caches in the winter 
because you can sit round a table in the pub or at home and you 
can solve the puzzle caches nearby and go and do them on a nice 
day. ”
“The problem solving took me a lot longer. Three weeks it took me. 
Every few hours going in and having a look and a few weeks later 
going in and having a look trying to work it out. A couple of 
lunchtimes sat in the office with a couple of colleagues to see if I 
can help you, that sort of thing. We did 5 over Christmas that were 
based on anagrams. You had to solve the anagrams before 
working out the coordinates and I had the whole family over
1182
