CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Understanding Geocaching Practices and Motivations
Kenton O’Hara
Hewlett-Packard Labs
Filton Road
Bristol, UK
ABSTRACT
Geocaching is a location-based activity that has been 
practiced for a number of years. As a sustained and 
established activity it represents an important opportunity 
for understanding everyday practices and motivations that 
can build up around a location-based activity. We present 
findings from a field study of everyday geocaching 
behaviour. In contrast to previous work, we take a broad 
perspective on the activity focussing beyond the in situ 
consumption of these experiences. We look, too, at the 
practices and motivations surrounding participants’ creation 
of these experiences. Further, we examine these behaviours 
within the social context of the on-line community that 
provides a significant basis for many of these behaviours. 
We use the findings to discuss broader implications for 
location-based experiences.
Author Keywords
Geocache, location-based computing, GPS (Global 
Positioning System), diary study, interviews.
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
Geocaching is the practice of hiding a container in a 
particular location, then publishing the latitude and 
longitude coordinates of the location on a geocaching web 
site [e.g. 7] for other “geocachers” to find using a GPS 
device. In essence it a kind a GPS-enabled treasure hunt. 
Ever since the first geocache was hidden in 2000, the hobby 
has grown considerably and now there are several hundred 
thousand caches hidden worldwide [7, 13, 21, 22].
Within the domain of location-based computing, geocaching 
represents an interesting and important object of study. As a 
technology-enabled location-based activity, it has various 
attributes that make it significant to understand both in itself 
but also to inform our more general understanding of 
location-based computing practices. First, it is a location- 
based experience that has established and sustained itself 
over several years. This allows us a perspective on a 
location-based experience that is difficult to get from limited 
time and place field trials of technology prototypes that, for
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
good practical reasons, have typified much user research on 
location-based applications. As authors such as [5, 19, 20] 
would argue, these limited field trial studies are not 
designed to explore the emergent everyday practices with 
technologies, the factors that shape these practices, and the 
social meaning they acquire as they as they become 
integrated into people’s everyday lives. A study of 
geocaching affords us the opportunity to get this longer term 
perspective on practices with a location-based experience.
Second, with geocaching, people participate not just through 
the consumption of location-based experiences but also 
through the creation of these experiences for others. User 
participation in the creation of location-based experiences is 
an established vision within UbiComp [e.g. 10, 11, 14, 23] 
but again has not been significantly explored as an ongoing 
everyday practice. An understanding of user creation 
practices and motivations, through the lens of geocaching, 
then, is informative to this broader UbiComp agenda – in 
particular, in light of the emerging crop of toolkits and 
applications designed to give consumers the ability to author 
and publish their own location-based experiences [6, 8, 9, 
10, 14].
Third, geocaching is of interest because it is comprised of 
both location-based elements and on-line elements. 
Understanding the diverse relationship between in situ and 
on-line behaviours is an important area of interest for 
UbiComp. Indeed, it has begun to be explored through 
several other interesting pieces of work [e.g. 1, 2, 16]. But 
our understanding of this area is in its infancy and there is 
need to map out other aspects of this relationship. 
Geocaching provides a new lens through which to explore 
another instantiation of the relationship between in situ and 
the on-line. Again significant in developing our 
understanding here is that geocaching is an established and 
ongoing practice with a large on-line community.
With this in mind, then, we present a study of geocaching 
practices and the social/contextual factors shaping them as 
they are enacted and given meaning in everyday life.
WHAT IS GEOCACHING?
As we have mentioned geocaching is a technology-enabled 
treasure-hunt but it is worth elaborating further on this basic 
description and key variants of the game to better 
understand the findings. A typical cache consists of a small 
waterproof container which can be hidden anywhere in the 
world. The latitude and longitude coordinates are noted and 
then published on a web site. The predominant website is 
geocaching.com [7]. A cache will contain a “log book” (to 
be signed and dated by those finding the cache) and
1177
