CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
potentially “treasure” depending on the size of the cache 
(sizes range from film canister “microcaches” to large 
ammunition boxes). Such “treasure” is generally low in 
value, consisting of novelty trinkets, small toys, coins and 
travel bugs (see later for description). Participants 
exchange this treasure – if they take something from the 
cache they must leave something of similar value. The basic 
caches are known as Traditional Caches, but some variants 
on this basic theme are worth noting. One variant is a Multi 
Cache in which participants go to several caches to get 
enough information to work out coordinates to a final cache 
containing the log book and treasure. A second variant is 
the Puzzle Cache where participants solve a puzzle to work 
out the coordinates of a cache. On the web site, each cache 
has its own dedicated web page. As well as the coordinates, 
this web page contains contextual information about the 
cache and the site, maps of starting points, a puzzle to work 
out the coordinates, and useful tips or things to look out for. 
Each cache has a 2-digit rating of difficulty: one digit rating 
difficulty of terrain; a second rating difficulty of the puzzle 
(a 5-5 is the most difficult). Logs for the cache and any 
related photos can also be posted on a cache’s web page.
PREVIOUS WORK ON GEOCACHING
Over the years, a lot has been written about geocaching. 
Much of this writing is short or journalistic in nature, 
providing a brief overview of the activity and commenting 
on various interesting anecdotal curiosities. There are also 
useful guide articles and books to the activity which provide 
more detail about the ins and outs of geocaching and how to 
take part [e.g. 17, 21, 22, 24]. Other writings focus on 
things such as forestry management concerns associated 
with the activity or the potential of geocaching for 
educational purposes [12, 24]. However such articles do not 
say much about how people partake in this activity on an 
everyday basis and an understanding of practice and 
motivation that can be informative for design.
In terms of formal study of the area, it is surprisingly hard to 
find published research on the topic. Perhaps the most 
significant and well known study is that done by Chavez and 
Schneider [3, 4]. This research was based around a 
questionnaire administered to practicing geocachers. As well 
as demographic breakdown of geocachers and quantification 
of average number of caches found and made, the study also 
begins to provide a quantitative characterisation of 
underlying motivations. These include for example, 
relaxation, being close to nature, and doing something with 
family. While these provide a useful starting point for our 
understanding there is very little in the way of rich 
qualitative detail. As such, the research does not really shed 
light on the details of geocaching in a way that could be 
informative to design. The study authors themselves make a 
call for future complementary research to explore more in- 
depth qualitative aspects of geocaching. We start to get 
more qualitative insights into practices through the work of 
Margot Kelley [13]. In her book, she presents various 
geocaching anecdotes that illustrate certain attributes of the 
activity and then offers a commentary that brings it all 
together. As well as some insight into practice, one of the
notable contributions of the book is to highlight the 
importance of the geocaching community (and associated 
issues such as trust and reciprocity) as opposed to just the 
activity itself. This social context within which the activity 
takes place turns out to be an important basis for 
understanding behaviour and motivations and is something 
that we return to in our analysis. Ultimately though, the 
concerns of her book are not with technology design and 
understanding, so practices are not viewed through an 
analytic lens that informs our concerns here. Consequently, 
additional research needs to be done within this context.
In much of the writing on geocaching, too, there is a 
tendency to focus only on the in situ consumption aspects of 
the experience that relate to searching for a cache. In terms 
of understanding everyday practices and motivations such a 
focus is too narrow. It ignores other points of participation 
in the activity such as the creation and publishing of caches 
by people and participation in the on-line community 
(Kelley [13] is an exception here and does break away from 
this focus to an extent in her discussion of on-line 
community). This is not simply a question of identifying the 
additional factors and motivations associated with these 
additional aspects. Rather, these different aspects of the 
experience are intimately bound up with each other. On-line 
participation shapes the in situ experience and vice versa. 
Likewise, participation in the creation of caches shapes 
motivations for on-line participation. In contrast to previous 
work, then, we take a more holistic view of the activity, 
combining both creation and consumption elements, as well 
as on-line and in situ aspects of the experience.
THE STUDY
Participants
We recruited 14 geocachers from the UK. Of these ten were 
male and 4 female (this gender bias is consistent with the 
breakdown in the study by Chavez and Schneider [3, 4]), 
with an age range from 20s to 60s. Some additional 
perspective on young children geocachers were provided by 
participants who were parents and grandparents and had 
been geocaching with their children. Participants covered a 
range of geocaching experience, some being very early to 
the activity with less than ten finds and others with many 
years experience and several hundred finds to their name. In 
selecting participants, the aim was not to create the basis for 
statistical comparisons across different types of users and 
experience levels (which would not be appropriate with 
such a sample size). Rather, in an exploratory study like 
this, the aim was to provide an opportunity for issues 
particular to different types of user to be raised in the study. 
Participants were given £40.00 vouchers for partaking in the 
study.
Method
The method was based around a diary study augmented by 
in-depth interviews. Participants were asked to keep a diary 
of their geocaching-related activities over a three week 
period. The events to record were not simply about going 
on a cache itself but pertained also to the broader set of 
activities surrounding it. This included any on-line logging 
posting comments, posting photos, research around a
1178
