CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
information exists across all task types and involves 
revisiting web pages to view new or updated information 
(e.g., reading the news or checking Facebook).
Revisitation Web Activity
Some web tasks can be completed within a single session. 
Other web tasks need multiple sessions and may require a 
users to return to an already seen page or pages to continue 
with the task, complete the task or repeat the task (e.g., to 
monitor a page). Tauscher and Greenberg [17] found that 
58% of pages visited by users had been previously 
accessed. Cockburn and MacKenzie [8] and Cockburn et al. 
[7] reported that 81% of visits to web pages are to pages 
that have been previously seen. Sellen et al. [15] found that 
many information gathering tasks (40%) took more than 
one session to complete and Kellar et al. [12] reported that 
59% of information gathering tasks were repeated. Brown 
and Sellen [3] also found that many users’ information 
needs spanned across several web pages which may be 
accessed in more than one session.
Current Web Browser Revisitation Tools
Despite the explosive growth of the Web and an increase in 
the number and type of web users the current browsers and 
the tools have changed little. For example, the web browser 
Mosaic (http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/Projects/mosaic.html) 
that was available with support from 1993 to 1997 had tools 
that were very similar to the tools found in most freeware 
browsers today (e.g., history list, hotlist, hotlist manager, 
home page, and forward/back buttons).
Some browser tools are designed to aid people to revisit 
web pages during a single session (i.e., to find pages in the 
current session) and others help users revisit pages over 
multiple sessions (i.e., to return to pages at a later date) [9]. 
The two most common browser tools for revisiting pages 
over multiple sessions are history lists and bookmarks.
History lists keep a record of all previously seen pages for a 
set period of time. Many studies have shown [2, 5, 7, 8, 12, 
17] that users tend not to use history lists as problems exist 
such as, duplicate entries and inconsistent page names [7, 
8]. Bookmarks (or Favorites) provide access to previously 
visited web pages. While bookmarks provide advantages as 
they can be grouped by categories and act as placeholders 
[1], there are disadvantages such as the need for managing 
these links [1] or refinding pages can be quite difficult. 
Despite these shortcomings people still use bookmarks [1, 
2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 17], and other strategies [2, 3, 4, 15] 
including using search engines to relocate pages, printing or 
saving web pages, or emailing links to themselves or others.
There has been recent research into developing new tools to 
help users revisit and organize their information for use 
over several sessions, such as Session Highlights [2, 9] and 
Webscrapbooks [15]. Other tools stand alone or combine 
existing tools into one providing single or multi-session 
support (or both). For example, Kaasten and Greenberg 
[10] integrated the back key, history list and bookmarks
into a single tool and provided a visual representation of 
how often pages were visited. Landmarks [14] can be used 
to enhance the revisitation of a web page with the refinding 
of information on the page by automatically scrolling to the 
exact location of user marked text when the page is 
reopened.
METHODOLOGY
We designed a mixed methodology to better validate the 
results using two approaches: a diary study and a field 
study. A diary study has the advantage of allowing us to 
collect information in an unobtrusive manner as participants 
self report their behaviour to identify and discover patterns 
of user behaviour [16]. We performed interviews at the end 
of the diary study to help verify the diary entries [16]. In 
the diary study [13], participants self-reported their multi- 
session tasks using a web-based diary. In particular, we 
were interested in finding out how often participants engage 
in multi-session tasks, how often participants return to work 
on the task during the study period, the types of tasks that 
participants classify as multi-session, which browser 
functions or tools participants use for these tasks and the 
frequency of use of these tools.
We used the data in the diary study to help us better define 
multi-session tasks and to help in the design of the logging 
feature for the customized version of Firefox for the field 
study. For both studies, we tried to minimize the effort of 
the participants by providing tools to make the recording of 
tasks easier (a web-based diary for the diary study and a 
customized toolbar in Firefox for the field study). While 
we acknowledged that having participants explicitly record 
their multi-session tasks may influence their behaviour, we 
felt that this was a necessary trade off to gather the relevant 
data relating specifically to multi-session tasks.
We use the qualitative and quantitative data collected 
during the diary study, the field study and the interviews to 
determine how the participants are performing multi- 
session tasks. We also consider a set of relevant findings 
for developers and researchers to use when designing 
browser tool features to help support multi-session tasks.
The Diary Study
Twenty-two participants (12 male and 10 female) from a 
university community of students, faculty and staff took 
part in the web-based diary study. Half the participants 
used Internet Explorer (IE) as their main browser and half 
used Firefox. Participants ranged in age from 19 years old 
to 50 years old, with the average age being 28 years. There 
were 16 students (11 graduate and 5 undergraduates), and 
six university employees (1 being a faculty member). The 
majority of the students (11/16) were in computer science. 
Seventy-seven percent (17/22) of the participants indicated 
that they use the Web several times a day and about 64% 
(14/22) of participants reported that they spend at least 11 
hours a week using the Web. Participants were 
compensated $25 for each week they took part in the study.
1188
