CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Title:	Planning a Vacation to PEI [Prince Edward Island]
Short Description:	To start planning a family trip to PEI in the summer
Date	May 19 (11:00) for 10-15 minutes
Subtask (ST):	Checked PEI site for accommodations available
ST complete:	No
Stop Reason:	Need to wait for a response from an email to get more information and review the web site further when have more time
Tools/Actions:	Opened windows, used history, typed URL, used a search engine, searched within the page, Email to others.
Task Finished:	No
Date	May 19 (11:11) for 5-10 minutes
Subtask (ST):	Found another link within the residence web page that provides more tourist related information that want to review and realized that I had sent an email to the wrong place
ST complete:	No
Stop Reason:	Need more time to review new links found. Waiting for response to email
Tools/Actions:	Opened windows, added a bookmark, searched within page
Task Finished:	No
Date	May 19 (3:15) for 10-15 minutes
Subtask (ST):	Received response to previous email. Checked information on prices and accommodations
ST complete:	No
Stop Reason:	Need to review with family
Tools/Actions:	Opened windows, used history, printed a page, searched within page
Task Finished:	No
Table 2. A Sample of a Task recorded in the Diary Study
June (after the study period). The participant recorded 
working on the task three times during the study, at 
different times during the day. For example, on May 19th at 
11:00 the participant submitted their web diary information. 
The participant worked on the task for 5-15 minutes each 
time to look for accommodations. The participant indicated 
that they opened windows, used their history list, typed a 
web address, used a search engine, searched within a page 
and emailed someone else during these sessions. It is 
interesting to note that on the last entry, it would seem as 
though a response to a previous email prompted the 
participant to return to the task.
Field Study
In the field study, one participant recorded a task titled 
“Physics A4” (see Table 3). This was an expected task, 
described as “4th Physics Assignment”. The task started on 
September 30th and finished on October 6th. The participant 
worked on the task five times. Table 3 contains 
information that the participant recorded each time they 
stopped working on the task (using the interactive toolbar). 
Using the logged data, we determined what actions they 
performed during each visit. For example, on September
Title:	Physics A4		
Short Description:	4th Physics assignment		
Date:	Sept. 30	Date:	Oct. 6
Subtask (ST):	Several problems	Subtask (ST):	All remaining problems
ST complete:	No	ST complete::	Yes
Stop Reason:	None given	Stop Reason:	Class
Other Apps:	Calculator	Other Apps:	Calculator
Task Finished:	No	Task Finished:	No
Date:	Oct. 3	Date:	Oct. 6
Subtask (ST):	Problems 1-9	Subtask (ST):	remaining two problems
ST complete:	Yes	ST complete:	Yes
Stop Reason:	Sleep required	Stop Reason:	None given
Other Apps:	Calculator	Other Apps:	Calculator
Task Finished:	No	Task Finished:	Yes
Date:	Oct. 5		
Subtask (ST):	Problems 2-33		
ST complete:	Yes		
Stop Reason:	Dinner		
Other Apps:	Calculator		
Task Finished:	No		
Table 3. A Sample of a Task recorded in the Field Study
30th the participant worked on the task for about an hour 
and a half and submitted a form 20 times, followed links 15 
times, copied into the browser two times, excluded a tab 
once and switched back into the task once (that is went 
from an excluded tab to an included tab). We can also 
anticipate from the gaps in time between the actions 
recorded in the browser (at most, 10 minutes) that the 
participant, while working on the task, was also either 
reading material on the Web related to the task (as there 
was only one occurrence of switching from the task), 
working on the assignment (e.g., they recorded also using a 
calculator while working on the task), or perhaps doing 
something unrelated to the task (e.g., taking a short break).
User Behaviour
We explored the behaviour of participants with respect to 
multi-session tasks. We examined how many multi-session 
tasks participants recorded, the number of web sessions in 
which participants performed multi-session tasks and how 
often participants executed multi-session tasks while 
working on other web tasks We also examined the actual 
browser tools and actions that participants used to perform 
multi-session tasks.
Multi-Session Tasks and Web Sessions
Diary Study
As can be seen in Table 4, in the diary study, participants 
(22 total) recorded 85 different multi-session tasks (80 tasks
1192
