CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
(a) The Interactive Toolbar
(c) The task title is highlighted in yellow and the user can check if a web page from a tab or window is included/excluded from the task
Figure 2. The customized toolbar for recording multi-session tasks
(b) Start a new multi-session task web form
how these users perform web tasks. Students tend to be 
early adaptors of technologies and are heavy users of the 
Web. We felt for an initial exploration into multi-session 
tasks, that this population would provide a robust picture 
with a mix of techniques and approaches to the task.
There are trade offs when designing studies. While web 
server logs can contain large amounts of quantitative data 
on a large population, the data does not include an 
understanding of the motivation of the user. Our studies 
were selected to record a rich data set consisting of self- 
motivated tasks collected within the participants’ own 
environment. Our results established that there are different 
types of multi-session tasks that often contain several sub- 
tasks. We also captured other interesting data points, such 
as reasons to stop and restart the tasks and task switching 
within each session. The interviews helped to refine how 
we can support experienced users perform these tasks.
RESULTS
We present the results according to User Behaviour and 
Task Characteristics. Where appropriate we report on the 
self-reported web diary entries, the field study automatic 
system logs and the interviews from both studies. Before 
presenting the results, we have included a sample of both a 
dairy and a field study log to show what multi-session task 
information was recorded and to also display how 
participants approached multi-session tasks.
Multi-session Task Samples
Diary Study
In the Diary Study, there was an expected task named 
“Planning a Vacation to PEI” (see Table 2). The task was 
first recorded on May 19th (although this task actually 
started before the study) and was expected to be finished in
1191
