CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Table 1. Summary of the data collected for analysis.
Class	Data type	Collection Method
Usage information		
Bin	# of unique visitors	Log analysis
	Time between visits	
	# of visits per visitor	
Patterns	Revisitation curve	Log analysis, clustering
Session	Previous URL visited	Log analysis of URLs visited prior to page
	Accessed via search?	
Self-reported intent		
Survey	Reason for revisitation	Survey, monitoring
Web page content		
URL	Length	Analysis of URL text
	Domain	
	Text substrings	
Content	Terms	Analysis of content
	ODP Category	SVM classifier
	Genre	Product classifier
Change	# of changes	Regular crawl
Structure	Outlinks	HTML parsing
Taxonomies in this space have sought to define revisitation 
in terms of user intent, goals, or strategies [16]. New 
browser designs have concentrated on better back buttons 
[8, 15], history or bookmarks [2, 11, 22], and monitoring 
and notification features [13]. Furthermore, several 
products and browser plug-ins have emerged to assist users 
in revisitation and monitoring activities (e.g. [5]).
The work we present here distinguishes itself from previous 
studies in a number of significant ways. First, to our 
knowledge, this is by far the largest study of Web 
revisitation behavior. While other studies have observed at 
most a few hundred participants in their population, the 
cohort in our work exceeds 612,000 people. Second, while 
other studies have pursued the longitudinal tracking of a 
small number of individuals in their complete, unbounded, 
interactions with the Web, we attempt to capture the 
interaction of hundreds of thousands of people with a 
specific set of Web pages. By broadly sampling pages and 
people we can begin to understand the characteristics of a 
page that are associated with specific revisitation behaviors.
A novel aspect of our methodology is that we are able to 
find diverse Web pages that are (re-)accessed in many 
different ways. With a small user population it is difficult 
to find Web pages that are not considered “popular” but are 
nonetheless visited sufficiently for statistical analysis. 
That is, the likelihood of two people in a small population 
both visiting anything but very popular pages is low. With 
the large user population in our study we are able to find 
multiple access patterns for all but the most unpopular 
pages. By understanding the variety of revisitation patterns 
we can provide design insights to better support the range 
of observed behaviors.
METHODOLOGY
To understand how and why a person revisits a Web page, 
we analyzed data from a variety of sources. The three main 
sources, usage information, self-reported intent, and Web 
page content, are summarized in Table 1. Below, we 
discuss how each type of information was collected.
Usage Information
We collected Web page visitation information by analyzing 
the logs collected from opt-in users of the Windows Live 
Toolbar. The toolbar provides augmented search features 
and reports anonymized usage behavior to a central server. 
Our analysis makes use of data from a sample of 612,000 
users for a five week period starting August 1, 2006. The 
five week period is sufficient to capture a wide variety of 
revisitation patterns, although we may seasonal or yearly 
patterns. However, as part of a different study of data from 
May and June of 2007, we took the opportunity to validate 
our findings and identified the same general patterns 
described below.
User Selection
Users were identified by an anonymized ID associated with 
each toolbar. As is the case with large-scale log analyses, if 
more than one person uses the same computer, they will 
have the same ID. However, we believe that, with the 
exception of some very popular URLs, revisits will be user 
specific. To simplify the discussion we refer to a toolbar 
instance as a “user.”
For simplicity, we restricted our sample to data gathered 
from English speaking users in the United States. We also 
filtered to eliminate users for which there was limited data. 
Only users for which we had data for over 7 days were 
considered. In order to eliminate the “long-tail” of non-
representative instances, users’ activities were characterized 
on a number of dimensions including: total number of 
URLs visited, unique URLs visited, number of URLs 
revisited, and number of URLs visited per day. The lowest 
ten percent of users in any of these dimensions were 
removed from the study population. Finally, users in the 
top one percent were also excluded (to eliminate robots and 
other badly behaving clients). The result of this filtering, 
for the time period of the study is over 612,000 valid users.
URL Selection
Because we were interested not only in pages with different 
popularity but pages with different revisitation patterns we 
defined a number of attributes for each page which we then 
used to systematically sample pages for further analysis. 
Specifically, we consider the number of unique visitors to a 
page (unique-visitors), the average and median inter-arrival 
(i.e. revisit) times for a page (inter-arrival time), and the 
average and median number of revisits per user for a page 
(per-user revisits). Per-user revisits for a page represents 
the median number of times a user will revisit that page.
Figure 1a shows a scatter plot of pages along these three 
dimensions, as well as histograms for each of the three 
criteria individually (log-scaled). Figure 1 c highlights that
1198
