CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
a)	b)
c)
d)
Figure 1a. A (log-scaled) scatter plot of pages (each point represents a single page) along the three 
dimensions of interest. 1b-d are the histograms for per-user visit, unique visitors, and inter-arrival time 
respectively (each point is a set of pages). The 55k pages were sampled from these distributions.
most pages were visited by very few people overall (the top 
leftmost point indicating that over one million pages only 
had one unique visitor), with a small number of revisits per 
person (Figure 1b), and at low (fast) inter-arrival times 
(Figure 1d). To sample broadly from this space without 
over-selecting from this “long-tail” we applied a pseudo- 
exponential binning to find thresholds for the unique-visitor 
(with a minimum of two) and per-user revisit criteria. The 
specific thresholds are noted as vertical lines in Figure 1(b- 
d). For the inter-arrival time criteria we opted to use 
thresholds that correspond to well understood time periods 
(e.g. 10 seconds, 1 minute, 1 hour, 1 day, 1 week).
As illustrated in Figure 1a, we defined four bins for the 
unique-visitor criteria, five for the per-user revisit criteria, 
and six for the inter-arrival time criteria (for a combination 
of 4 x 5 x 6 = 120 possible bins). Each URL was annotated 
with these three bin numbers, and we sampled from this 
space. Some oversampling of popular pages was added by 
explicitly including the top 5000 most visited pages. We 
crawled the pages to ensure that they were still publicly 
available (in conformance with the robots.txt protocol), and 
removed from further analysis those that were not. The 
final sample included 54,788 URLs with an average of 
468.3 (median 650) URLs in each of the 120 bins.
Self-Reported Intent
The interaction logs allow us to observe what people did, 
and led us to categorize revisitation in a way that 
emphasizes observable behaviors. However, the logs do 
not tell us why people behaved the way we observed. For 
this reason we conducted a complimentary user survey to 
gather information about user intent. In addition to helping 
us better understand revisitation patterns, the results of the 
user study also serve to relate our behavioral observations 
to previous taxonomies of revisitation that focus on intent 
(e.g., monitoring or communication [14]).
Twenty volunteers participated in the study (all daily 
WWW users; 7 were in their 20s, 9 in their 30s, and four 
were 40 or older; 19 were male). Participants were 
employees of Microsoft in a range of roles (developers, 
researchers, interns, program managers, etc.) Each 
participant installed software to log Web page visits, which 
they used for one to two months. We recorded visits only 
for the 55,000 URLs in our log study as well as a random 
subset from the user’s cache and Web history. At the end 
of the logging period, participants were asked to complete a 
survey to gather greater detail about ten of the Web pages 
they had revisited during the observation period. Of the 
survey responses, 49% (~80 URLs) overlapped with the 
55,000 pages in the log study. The remaining URLs
1199
