CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Table 2. Percent of respondents (n = 170) who mentioned using 
the following strategies when resuming a suspended investigation.
Strategy	Respondents
Active Storage / Active Retrieval	55%
Written or typed notes	30%
Browser bookmarks	26%
Save Web pages locally as files	5.3%
E-mail to self	2.4%
Online bookmarks/tagging	1.8%
Print Web pages	0.6%
Passive Storage / Active Retrieval	8.2%
Browser history	7.6%
Online query history	1.2%
Passive Storage / Passive Retrieval	49%
Memory	36%
Leave browser open	14%
Link coloring	2.4%
Autocomplete	2.4%
they use to refamiliarize themselves with the context of 
their suspended investigations upon resumption.
The common strategies described by respondents can be 
distinguished along two axes: initiative (whether the user 
was active or passive) and stage (whether the strategy 
applies to the storage or retrieval of the task context). For 
example, an active approach to storage attempts to preserve 
the state, strategies, and/or results of a search task for later 
use, while a passive approach to storage involves no 
explicit user actions to save information during a search 
session. An active approach to retrieval seeks out 
mechanisms that have captured data (either explicitly or 
implicitly) that may help in re-establishing a search context, 
while a passive retrieval strategy uses only information that 
is automatically revealed by basic browser or search engine 
interfaces. We describe strategies by indicating the 
initiative type for each of those stages.
Active Storage/Active Retrieval strategies reported in our 
survey included saving the contents of a website (either into 
a local file or by printing), bookmarking a website (either 
locally in the browser or via an online bookmarking utility), 
and note-taking (either by hand, by typing into a document, 
via self-email, or via instant messages).
Examples of Passive Storage/Active Retrieval strategies 
include using browser history to find information from a 
previously executed search task, or visiting a search-engine-
specific query history tracker to re-find a useful query.
Passive Storage/Passive Retrieval strategies reported by our 
survey population included relying on memory when 
resuming a search (and possibly starting over and repeating 
previously issued queries), leaving the browser open on the 
machine when suspending a task so its state was preserved
upon resumption, relying on the browser’s autocomplete 
functionality to serve as a memory aid when typing queries, 
and relying on the browser’s coloring of visited links to 
prompt memory about previously viewed Web sites.
Table 2 shows the percentage of people in our survey 
population who reported employing each of the above 
strategies (note that the numbers total to more than 100%, 
as some people listed several of these strategies). Note that 
no respondents described using an Active Storage/Passive 
Retrieval strategy, which is not surprising given that such a 
combination represents wasted storage effort.
In summary, previous work and our own survey indicate 
that information-seeking tasks are frequently interrupted, 
yet current Web browsers provide only partial support for 
task resumption. Furthermore, our data show that an 
effective tool for re-finding information should support a 
variety of re-access strategies.
SEARCHBAR
To improve the user experience of resuming suspended 
investigations and re-finding previously encountered online 
content, we created SearchBar (Figure 1), a system for 
capturing, storing, and presenting an annotatable, integrated 
search and browsing history within the context of a Web 
browser. SearchBar is implemented as a plugin for Internet 
Explorer. As such, it is able to monitor all navigation 
events, to recognize URLs corresponding to common 
search engines, and to track a user’s browsing history 
subsequent to a search. More details on these features are 
provided below. Once enabled, SearchBar is visible in any 
new tabs or browser windows the user creates, and content 
is mirrored across all of these views. SearchBar can be 
hidden or revealed using a keyboard shortcut.
SearchBar presents visited Web pages hierarchically 
according to the search queries that led to those visits. A 
recent Pew Internet Project report [20] found that search 
engine use was the second most common online activity, 
after e-mail. The ubiquity of search in Web use, users’ 
tendencies to repeat previously executed searches [25, 26], 
and the tendency of informational [3, 21] and exploratory 
[29] search tasks to involve multiple query-browse 
iterations inspired us to use queries as a fundamental 
organization metaphor in the SearchBar interface. Thus, 
SearchBar functions as a rich history mechanism, 
proactively capturing all queries issued and URLs visited 
subsequent to each query. The search-centric structure is 
manifested by showing all URLs browsed to subsequent to 
a query as child nodes of that query, in reverse- 
chronological order, thus revealing to users the process 
through which they reached a piece of information. 
Clicking on a URL or query navigates the browser to that 
page or those search results.
For the large portion of users who choose to employ only 
Passive Storage strategies, all queries and browsing are 
proactively captured and stored under SearchBar’s 
“Default” topic. However, for those users who prefer to
1209
