CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
the goal is to accumulate an internal model of part of the 
viewable scene; opportunistic browsing to see what is there 
rather than to model what is seen; and involuntary browsing 
which is undirected or unconscious. We primarily observed 
exploratory browsing, and saw that, as part of this process, 
participants established a layout of cards, or put cards in ob-
servable categories (e. g., by variables or graph types). It 
seemed that those participants who created a specific lay-
out of cards in their work area created a type of overview 
by imposing an organization (even if a loose one) on the in-
formation artefacts. Thus, we saw a physical manifestation 
of the creation of an “internal model of the data.” Further-
more, these physical layouts (a consequence of the browsing 
phase) clearly relate to Shneiderman’s “overview” task [15].
“Search for schema” seems to involve activities that we char-
acterize as being a part of parsing, specifically the identifica-
tion of attributes on which to operate later. The activity of 
identifying attributes to look for in the data described in this 
model is augmented in our parse component by additional ac-
tivities of discussion, and note taking. “Search for a schema” 
and “instantiate schema” involve activities that help in the 
search for the best way to solve the given problem with the 
provided visualization tool and therefore relate to our task 
strategy process, albeit being more tool-centered than our 
definition. Clarification is not an explicit component in this 
model but the need for clarification would typically arise dur-
ing the searching for and instantiating a schema components. 
Our selection process is most closely related to the “foraging 
for data” component but can extend into the “searching for 
and instantiating a schema” components when participants 
have ended their browsing activities and are ready to select 
specific information important to solving the task. This may 
include activities that we see as part of an operation process: 
problem-solving, including Bertin’s three levels of reading: 
read fact, read compare, read pattern [2]. Validation is not 
directly represented in Card et al.’s model [3]; perhaps, as 
we have also observed, because validation seemed to be of-
ten omitted or quite brief for individual participants and their 
model focuses on a single user.
The Sense-Making Cycle is the most highly coupled and in-
teractive of the three models we are comparing to. It makes 
a strong temporal (cyclical) suggestion but does allow for 
loops within this cycle over defined forward and backward 
connections between components. In general, the Sense- 
Making Cycle is not identical to our model but predicts some 
of our findings in terms of temporal flexibility and shares 
some components with our model. An adaptation of the 
Sense-Making Cycle by Pirolli and Card is presented in [20] 
for some type of analysis work. This extension includes two 
main components: A Sense-Making Loop in which a mental 
model of the data is iteratively developed and a Data For-
aging Loop in which information is searched, read, filtered, 
and extracted. This model tries to cover most aspects of intel-
ligent analysis work and our processes mostly relate to those 
parts within the Sense-Making Loop as discussed above.
Collaborative Analysis Models
In studying pairs using distributed CAVE environments, Park 
et al. [12] articulate a five-stage pattern of behaviour: prob-
lem interpretation, agreement on vis tool to use, search 
for a trend, discovery reporting, and negotiation of dis-
coveries. Mark et al. [10] also provide a five-stage collabora 
tive information visualization model: parse question, map 
1 variable to program, finding correct visualization, val-
idating the visualization, and validation of the entire an-
swer. A loop is included for additional variables from stages
four back to stage two. The temporal sequence of stages in 
this model was derived from a study of pairs solving both 
free data discovery and focused question tasks in both dis-
tributed and co-located settings. These two models share 
some similarities, but are clearly not identical. A possible 
explanation for the disparity is that Mark et al.’s model [10] 
focuses on a context where the pair negotiates exploration 
through a shared tool (i. e., they could not work in a decou-
pled fashion [18]) whereas Park et al.’s model [12] allows 
for more loosely coupled work.
Both models share some similarity in the processes discov-
ered in our study. Our parsing process relates closely to 
Mark et al.’s “parse question” [10] and Park et al.’s “prob-
lem interpretation” [12] stages. We augment these stages 
with activities that might not have been part of the specific 
environment under study in both models: note taking and fre-
quent discussion about how to interpret a certain task. The 
discussion of the collaboration style is not explicitly covered 
in either model. However, similar to Park et al.’s study we 
observed a strong tendency in all group conditions for partic-
ipants to do at least part of the work using their own views 
and information artefacts. Similar differences in work styles 
for spatially fixed information visualization tasks (e. g., maps 
that cover the whole workspace) have been described in [18], 
but they have not been put in a greater context of other pro-
cesses of visual analysis. According to Mark et al.’s model, 
“map 1 variable to program” is closely related to our task 
strategy process in that it would also involve a collaborative 
agreement on the most appropriate visualizations, parame-
ters, or views to solve the problem [10], like Park et al.’s 
“agreement on visualization tools to use” [12]. However, our 
description of this process discusses the activities involved 
in establishing a strategy rather than describing it in the con-
text of a specific tool.
In contexts where new visualizations are introduced, or in-
dividuals are brought in without prior training on particu-
lar visualizations, the need for clarification would be com-
mon. Specifically, beyond providing users with aid in de-
veloping an understanding of a particular visualization, we 
would expect individuals to ask for collaborators’ interpreta-
tions of that visualization or interaction technique or to put 
their own views and interpretations up for discussion. Con-
sidering clarification as a process of analysis is important 
for designing and evaluating visualization tools but it is not 
a specific part of the two collaborative analysis models.
Our articulation of the selection process is related to parts of 
the activities covered by Mark et al.’s “find correct visualiza-
tion” stage and Park et al.’s “search for trend.” Our descrip-
tion of selection, however, more broadly captures the notion 
of picking out important information beyond operations in a 
specific visualization system.
1224
