CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
“Independent search for a trend including some adjustments 
to viewing parameters” and “report discovery” include op-
erations as defined in our model. Operation is not an indi-
vidual stage in Mark et al.’s model but is integrated in the 
“find correct visualization” stage [10]. In groups, the vali-
dation stage was much more visible and it is also included 
in these two models as the last stage of information analy-
sis [10, 12]. Mark et al. noticed differences in validation 
between the free discovery and focused question tasks; a re-
sult that was echoed in our study. During more open-ended 
questions, validation was usually longer and involved more 
discussion than for focused tasks.
In general, both these models are related to ours in that they 
share some of the processes discovered in our study but are 
quite different in their suggestion of a fixed temporal order.
Temporality and Process-Free Tools
Many of the existing models suggest a typical temporal order 
of components; however, our analysis of the temporal occur-
rence of the framework processes suggests that this typical 
temporal ordering was not evident. We argue that our find-
ing of a lack of a common temporal ordering reflects the 
design of our study; in particular, the stipulation that partic-
ipants would use a paper-based “information visualization” 
tool along with traditional tools such as pens, paper and 
notepaper. Traditional tools have no specific flow in terms of 
which tools should be used first or for what purpose. Similar 
observations have been made by Heiser et al. [7] in a study of 
non-digital co-located and remote sketching activities. The 
flexibility afforded by traditional tools allowed individuals 
to approach tasks differently. As a consequence, they also 
allowed groups to transition between multiple stages of inde-
pendent and closely coupled work rather than regimenting 
particular work process.
In summary then, the processes in our analytic framework 
map to related models, yet our analysis suggests that the tem-
poral ordering of these components is by no means universal. 
In many digital information visualization systems, the flow 
of interaction is regimented by structure; in contrast, the use 
of traditional tools in our study allowed participants to freely 
choose how to approach and solve problems. On this basis, 
we believe this analytic framework can be used as a means to 
understand information visualization tools: for example, to 
asses temporal or procedural work processes that a particular 
system might impose.
IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN
Most information visualization systems have been designed 
for a single user, but co-located collaborative analysis of in-
formation is also common. Until relatively recently people 
have had to rely on physical prints of information for co- 
located collaborative analysis. The emergence of large, inter-
active displays opens new possibilities for the development 
of interfaces to support collaborative analysis using informa-
tion visualizations. In this section, we discuss implications 
for the design of single-user and co-located multi-user infor-
mation visualization systems based on our findings.
Support Flexible Temporal Sequence of Work Processes:
Individuals have unique information analysis practices based 
on their prior experiences, successes, and failures. These 
well-established work practices should be supported by dig-
ital systems. Our study showed that all participants worked 
differently in terms of the order and length of individual 
work processes they engaged in, suggesting the need for dig-
ital systems to be relatively unrestricting. The temporality of 
work processes suggested by previous models of the analytic 
process could imply that common information visualization 
tools require a specific process-flow. Our study, however, 
suggests that users of digital systems may benefit if a flex-
ible order of operations can be performed. Co-located col-
laborative systems, in which more than one user may work 
and interact at the same time, should possibly allow group 
members to be engaged in different types ofprocesses at the 
same time and also allow them to work together adopting the 
same processes. For example, one person should be able to 
select data from or browse a database while another already 
works on previously selected information.
Support Changing Work Strategies:
In group settings, our participants dynamically switched be-
tween closely coupled and more independent work. The 
browse, parse, operate, and select processes were most of-
ten done on individual views of the data in a more loosely 
coupled fashion. Discussion of collaboration style and estab-
lish task-specific strategy, clarify, and verify often happened 
in closer cooperation with the other partner(s) and often in-
cluded shared views of the data. To support these chang-
ing work strategies information visualization tools for co- 
located work need to be designed to support individual and 
shared views of and interactions on the data. Each collabora-
tor should be able to perform individual operations on these 
views unaffected by his or her team members’ actions. How-
ever, the tool should also help to share these individual views 
and, thus, provide awareness of one team member’s actions 
to the other collaborators. To support individual views of the 
data, interaction with the underlying data structures (deletion 
of nodes in a tree, change of query parameters, etc.) should 
be designed so as to not influence others’ views of the same 
data. However, to support shared views of the data, these pre-
vious operations should be transferable to group views, for 
example, to combine highlights, annotations, or other parts 
of an interaction history.
Support Flexible Workspace Organization:
Information artefacts were re-arranged on the table by all of 
our participants. We observed that participants had quite dis-
tinct individual workspaces on the table in which they laid 
out their cards. These workspaces were quite flexible and 
would change depending on tasks as well as, in group set-
tings, on team members’ spatial needs. This observation is 
echoed by the studies of collaborative behavior reported in 
[14] that call for co-located collaborative systems to provide 
appropriate functionality in these personal workspaces (ter-
ritories). We refer to their paper for further guidelines of 
how to support personal territories for co-located collabora-
tive work.
1225
