CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
processing frameworks. These two studies are most related, 
but our results differ in that by studying non-digital infor-
mation processing, our framework does not reflect the pro-
cessing constraints built into existing software. A detailed 
comparison of these frameworks with ours is included in the 
discussion section.
Several researchers have modeled an individual user’s in-
volvement in visual information processing as an iterative 
sequence of components; however, each model is unique in 
terms of its focus, and how it abstracts the process. One 
perspective has been concerned specifically with the design 
of digital information visualization tools, focusing on how 
a person manipulates view and visualization transformation 
parameters, e. g., [5, 9]. Jankun-Kelly et al. [9] propose a 
model of visual exploration for analyzing one person’s inter-
action with a digital visualization system. A core proposition 
of this work is that a fundamental operation in the visual 
exploration process is the manipulation of visualization pa-
rameters. This model is effective in capturing the temporal 
aspects of visual parameter manipulation; however, it does 
not capture the higher-level semantics of a person’s interac-
tion (i. e., why was a parameter changed?). Chi and Riedl 
[5] address this aspect, basing their semantic operator frame-
work on a person’s intention of action (i. e., view filtering vs. 
value filtering), classifying and organizing operators in the 
analysis process. At the other end of the spectrum, Amar 
and Stasko [1] name higher-level analytic activities that a 
person using a visualization system would typically perform, 
such as complex decision-making, learning a domain, iden-
tifying the nature of trends, and predicting the future. Shnei-
derman [15] outlines a two-step process (“overview then de-
tail”), that addresses a task-centric perspective on the analy-
sis process. He suggests seven different operations that in-
formation visualization tools should support to facilitate the 
problem solving process: overview, zoom, filter, details-on-
demand, relate, history, and extract.
A model by Russell et al. [13], derived from studying col-
laborative information consolidation activities, describes a 
“Learning Loop Complex,” a cyclic process of searching for 
representations and encoding information. Indirectly, these 
observations have led to Card et al.’s sense making cycle 
[3] (extended in [20]). A number of research directions in 
other domains have asked questions about how collabora-
tors share and coordinate their efforts to work together (see 
[4]). While these models relate to our research question, 
most have a stronger cognitive focus. We will later revisit 
the sense-making cycle by Card et al. [3] as it shares some 
processes defined in our framework.
Instead of focusing on either task driven or meta-cognitive 
processes, we are interested in the general processes that oc-
cur during collaborative information analysis (independent 
of the confines of a computer-based infovis tool), as well as 
the interactions with visualizations and those between team 
members. We are interested in general processes that form 
the basis of collaborative information visualization as the 
low-level mechanics of interacting with an infovis tool are 
probably not indicative of how teams would solve a visual 
information problem.
Choosing a Methodology
When developing software tools to augment work practices, 
at least three fundamentally different approaches exist. One 
is to study possible improvements for support of the process 
through studying the current software support or tools in use. 
Another is to hypothesize about improvements to existing 
tools, to develop a promising tool and study it in compar-
ison to the existing tools. A third is to work towards an 
improved understanding of the process in order to develop 
a better match between the natural human process and its 
software support.
Our approach falls into the third class. It begins with the 
premise that through observations of people’s interactions 
with physical artefacts, we can develop a richer understand-
ing of basic work processes that can be used to inform in-
terface design. Other researchers (e. g. [14, 19]) have taken 
this approach, studying how groups accomplish tasks in non- 
digital contexts in order to understand what activities digital 
tools should support. The reasoning behind this choice is 
that people’s physical interactions with these familiar arte-
facts and tools would closely reflect how they understand 
and think about the problem at hand. For instance, Tang’s 
study of group design activities around shared tabletop work-
spaces [ 19] revealed the importance of gestures and the work-
space itself in mediating and coordinating collaborative work. 
Similarly, Scott et al. [14] studied traditional tabletop game- 
play and collaborative design, focusing on the use of table-
top space and the sharing of items on the table. While these 
authors studied traditional physical contexts, ultimately their 
goal was to understand how to design digital tabletop tools. 
Both studies contributed to a better understanding of collab-
orative work practices involving tables in general. The ap-
proach taken in these two studies works well when address-
ing a design area where the critical issues are poorly under-
stood. For instance, we are uncertain how groups will work 
together with information visualizations if given the ability 
to do so freely (e. g. prior efforts involved systems where in-
dividuals could not work in parallel [12, 10]). Furthermore, 
we do not know how teams will share and make use of inter-
mediate results, or indeed whether they will even share and 
work together from the same views or artefacts of the data. 
Our work builds on prior efforts in developing frameworks 
to understand the visual information analysis process, and 
the work of researchers attempting to understand collabora-
tive behaviour. The study we describe here takes a first step 
toward building our understanding of collaborative visual in-
formation analysis. We can then leverage this understanding 
to build infovis tools that support collaboration.
A STUDY OF THE INFORMATION ANALYSIS PROCESS 
We conducted an exploratory study to understand the visual 
analysis process. The study focused on examining individu-
als and small groups in this process.
Participants
We recruited 24 paid participants from the university popula-
tion, 14 female, 10 male. The mean age of the participants 
was 26 years. We had 4 groups each of singles, pairs, and 
triples. With one exception, all pairs and triples were known
1218
