CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Process	Description	Goal
Browse
Parse
Discuss Collaboration Style 
Establish Task Strategy 
Clarify
Select
Operate
Validate
scan through the data
reading and interpretation of the task description 
discuss task division strategy
establish how to solve a task with given data &amp; tools 
understand a visualization
pick out visualizations relevant to a particular task 
higher-level cognitive work on specific data view 
confirm a partial or complete solution to a task
get a feel for the available information 
determine required variables for the task 
determine how to solve the tasks as a team 
find an efficient way to solve the problem 
avoid mis-interpretation of the data
minimize the number of visualizations to read 
solve task or sub-task
avoid errors in completing the task
Table 2. The eight processes in information analysis. “Discuss Collaboration Style” only applies to collaborative analysis scenarios.
Establish Task Strategy:
In this process, participants searched for the best way to 
solve a specific task using the given data and tools. The 
goal of establishing such a strategy was to determine the 
next views or interactions required to extract variables or 
patterns from the data to solve the problem efficiently. As 
a team activity, this discussion occurred 22 times with the 
help of individual information artefacts for all groups and 
tasks; one participant would present a possible approach to 
the other participant(s) using examples. For example, Fig-
ure 4 illustrates an instance where two participants are dis-
cussing how to solve a particular task using a specific chart 
they had chosen. The team frequently flipped between look-
ing at a shared chart and the chart in their own hand. This 
explicit strategy discussion was more common when teams 
worked in a joint work collaboration style. When partici-
pants worked independently or in parallel, the determination 
of strategy seemed to occur silently (perhaps in parallel to 
the parsing process). For instance, participants might articu-
late their strategies without discussing the explicit reasoning 
for it: “I am now going to look for the highest peak.” During 
the video analysis, we only observed on average 1–2 minutes 
per scenario in which teams specifically discussed their strat-
egy to solve a task. At the end of this process—depending 
on the chosen strategy—participants often reorganized their 
information artefacts in the space to create an adequate start-
ing position for solving the task. For example, if the strategy 
was to find two data charts, then the workspace might be or-
ganized to facilitate the finding of these two data charts (as 
in Figure 3).
Figure 4. Discussing a strategy on how to solve a task using the
chosen chart. Information artefacts are used as aids.
Clarify:
Clarification activities involve efforts to understand an in-
formation artefact. While we provided users common bar, 
pie, and line charts, we also provided less commonly used 
stacked bar charts and an area chart. The unfamiliar charts re-
quired more careful scrutiny by participants. For individual
participants, ambiguities in the data display were resolved 
twice using other charts as aids. Others did not attempt a 
clarification but chose alternative representations leaving out 
the one that was unclear. In teams, the need for clarification 
involved discussion with other participants to decipher and 
understand the charts and sharing of information artefacts. 
Overall clarification required less than 1 min for Scenario B 
and no clarification was required for Scenario C. The clar-
ification times for Scenario B were higher for each group 
as this scenario contained the most unfamiliar stacked area 
chart. Only those triples that included participants which 
were unfamiliar with certain charts required longer than av-
erage (1 min, 2 min) for clarification in Scenario B.
Select:
Selection activities involved finding and picking out infor-
mation artefacts relevant to a particular task. We observed 
several different forms of selection, often dependent on the 
organization of data that was established during browsing. 
We characterized these styles of selection by how artefacts 
were spatially separated from one another:
•	Selection from an overview layout. Beginning with an 
overview layout (e. g., small-multiples overview from Fig-
ure 3), relevant cards are picked out. Selection of cards 
from this layout involved either a re-arrangement of the 
organization scheme so that relevant cards were placed 
within close proximity or marking by either placing hands 
or fingers on the cards, or using pens.
•	Selection from a categorization layout. Starting from a 
pile-based categorization of information artefacts, piles are 
scanned and relevant cards picked out. These cards are 
then placed in new piles that carry semantic meaning (e. g., 
relevant, irrelevant). Previously existing piles might change 
their meaning, location, and structure in the process.
How users organized these selected data cards was depen-
dent on how they intended to operate on (or use) them. The 
left of Figure 5 illustrates an instance where two cards were 
relocated and placed side-by-side for comparison. Figure 5 
shows an example on the right where a variable was to be 
measured, so the card was relocated closer in the individ-
ual person’s workspace. The spatial organization of cards 
relative to piles of data could carry semantic meaning. For 
example, when an operation on a data card was to be brief, 
a single card was drawn out, operated upon, and then re-
placed. Similarly, the organization scheme might reflect the 
perceived importance of a set of cards: we observed piles of 
information artefacts that were clearly discarded (Figure 6). 
Temporally, we also observed different selection strategies,
1221
