CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
which could be loosely classified as “depth-first” or “breadth- 
first.” A “depth-first” approach involved selecting a single 
card, operating on it for a period of time, and then selecting 
the next card (e. g., Figure 6, left). “Breadth-first” strategies 
selected all cards deemed relevant in a single pass and then 
operated on them afterwards (see Figure 6, right). On av-
erage, participants spent ,: 4min selecting data, the second
most common process in our study.
of tools to aid comparison: marking individual values, bend-
ing or cutting individual charts (to facilitate placing values 
physically side-by-side), or on 7 occasions we noted overlay-
ing of charts atop one another in an attempt to see through 
the top chart. The operation process typically generated a 
set of results which were synthesized with previous results 
and/or written down. During team activity, results were re-
ported to the team if other tasks depended on these results 
(e. g., during joint activity). Operation was the most time- 
consuming activity in our study. On average participants 
spent almost half of their time (11 min) on operations per 
scenario. 64% of operations followed a selection process.
Figure 5. Chart organization during selection depending on 
their intended usage. Left: a participant selected four cards 
for comparison placing them side by side in her hand. Right: 
three participants selected individual charts and placed them 
in the center of their workspace to measure a specific value.
Figure 6. Changing categorization during selection. Left: a
participant placed irrelevant cards to her left and picks single
cards to operate on from the working set. Right: a participant
picked out relevant cards, placed them close to himself, and
put irrelevant cards in a pile further away.
Operate:
Operation activities involved higher-level cognitive work on 
a specific view of the data with the goal of extracting infor-
mation from the view to solve the task. Figure 7 illustrates 
the two most common types of operation activities: extract-
ing a data value, and comparing data values. To extract a 
data value from a card, participants often used rulers or some 
other form of measuring tool (e. g., edge of a piece of pa-
per). To aid recall of these values, participants made annota-
tions: sometimes on the charts themselves, and other times 
on spare pieces of papers. During the course of both scenar-
ios each participant on average annotated at least three infor-
mation artefacts (2 during Scenario B, 1 during Scenario C). 
Comparing values on a specific chart or values across charts 
was also extremely frequent. Every participant in our study 
compared charts on at least one occasion. The most frequent 
comparison involved just two charts but we also noted 15 oc-
casions of participants comparing three or more charts. In 
our study, participants arranged the charts for a comparison 
during selection: cards would be placed in close proximity 
to facilitate easier reading of either individual values or pat-
terns (Figure 6). Participants were quite creative in their use
Figure 7. Two participants showing two different types of
operations on the information. The participant on the right is
comparing two cards using a ruler while the participant on the
top is measuring a particular value.
Validate:
Validation activities involved confirming a partial or com-
plete solution to a task. Beyond confirming the correctness 
of a solution, teams also ensured the correctness of the pro-
cess or approach that was taken. In teams, the validation 
process often included discussion coupled with sharing of 
information artefacts: on 47 occasions participants validated 
others’ solutions by looking carefully at the solution using 
shared representations, while other times they searched for 
the solution by using their own information artefacts (i. e., 
the process or approach was shared instead of the artefacts 
themselves). When working more independently, the vali-
dation process only involved the presentation of a solution 
by the group member who had it. In groups where collab-
orators worked more closely, the collaborators would often 
ensure that the other participants had understood the process 
with which a solution was found. For individual participants, 
the validation process involved looking at other data cards 
(i. e., different representations) for the same answer. Of in-
terest is that individuals appear to be concerned about the 
“correctness” of their solution/approach based on other infor-
mation artefacts, while teams also rely on a collective valida-
tion from the social group. On average groups of three spent
the longest time validating their answers (,: 3 min), pairs 
spent ,: 2 min validating, and individuals spent less than one
minute validating their answers.
Temporal “Sequence” of Processes
To understand how the processes related to one another in 
terms of a temporal relationship, we analyzed the video data 
from our study, coding each individual’s activities using these 
process labels. This analysis revealed three aspects of partic-
ipants’ activity: first, while certain processes frequently oc-
1222
