CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
examined collaborative problem solving on such highly 
complex tasks as investigative analysis [e.g., 4, 18, 38].
Complex problem solving as a collaborative task
Two defining attributes of real-world complex problem 
solving are that it is ill structured (in the sense that the 
problem definition is unclear) and, as noted above, that it 
often involves knowledge or information dispersed across 
people and groups [18, 33]. For instance, a detective in 
Illinois investigating a possible serial killer may sift through 
local cold cases looking for linkages but, unknown to this 
detective, relevant cases may exist in other states [e.g., 30]. 
Because of the need for insight and the fact of dispersed 
information, the success of criminal and intelligence 
investigations, scientific discovery, medical problem 
solving, and other important real world problems often 
depends on opportunistic cross-talk across information 
sources and serendipity [9, 33]. Collaboration can increase 
the likelihood that such cross talk and serendipity will 
occur. Collaboration can increase group performance over 
that of individual performance in these situations [15] but 
effective collaboration may depend on the free flow of 
information among partners [22, 35].
There now exist computer-based visualization tools that 
support scanning for hidden linkages and sharing dispersed 
information. Our research question is whether these tools 
do in fact change problem solving strategies, particularly 
information sharing, the collaborative relationship among 
partners, and ultimate collaborative task performance. We 
studied a type of network visualization application similar 
to those used in intelligence analysis and criminal 
investigations (for example, Analyst’s Notebook, 
www.i2inc.com/Products/Analysts_Notebook/default.asp). 
Our experimental design tested whether the network 
visualization tool improved collaborative task performance 
of remote partners who were synchronously solving a 
complex analytic problem, and the extent to which sharing 
features in the tool affected the effectiveness of the 
collaboration.
Information Visualization in Collaboration
Previous studies have shown that visualizations can 
facilitate information sharing in collocated groups [7, 29]. 
Mark, Carpenter, and Kobsa [23], in a seminal study of 
visualization in collaboration, showed that collocated pairs’ 
and remote pairs’ use of visualization tools for making bar 
graphs of statistical data improved their analysis 
performance over that of participants using the tools alone. 
Our work builds on these promising results, examining how 
visualizations aid collaboration.
Visualization tools could aid collaborative problem solving 
in at least two ways. First, if each member of a group has a 
visualization of his or her own data, then the individual 
member’s insight into the problem may improve, which in 
turn would raise the probability of better group 
performance. If so, visualization tools might not need to 
provide for jointly viewable or manipulated data, or even 
promote discussion, as long as they improve the problem
solving of individuals in the group. This idea leads to the 
following general hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: Access to a visualization tool will increase 
remote pair performance in complex problem solving.
Second, prior research suggests that visualization tools may 
improve collaborative performance because they allow for 
shared access to data, and encourage information sharing 
and discussion. In their evaluation of CACHE, a system 
that supports intelligence analysis via visual data 
presentation, Billman et al. [4] report that distributed pairs 
using CACHE collaboratively overcame a priori biases and 
did more effective data analysis. Mark et al.’s [24, 25] 
video analyses of their experimental data showed that 
remote pairs using a visualization communicated more 
intensively than collocated pairs. Their results suggest that 
communication was necessary to take best advantage of the 
visualization tools. This argument leads to the second 
hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2: Access to a visualization tool will increase 
remote pair performance in complex problem solving when 
this access increases information sharing and discussion by 
the pair.
We further asked how fully a visualization tool needs to 
support shared information and communication. 
Visualization tools can support different levels of sharing. 
At the most basic level, each member of a collaboration can 
visualize his or her own data but cannot see others’ 
visualizations (Unshared Visualizations). Or, collaborators 
might be able to view their own and others’ visualizations 
but would be able to directly manipulate only their own 
(Shared View-Only Visualizations); many applications can 
be shared in this manner. A third possibility is that 
collaborators have full access to a shared visualization 
application that allows for viewing everyone’s data and 
jointly manipulating these data (Shared Full-Access 
Visualization) [e.g., 28]. Full access would support shared 
information sharing automatically, which might be 
especially important when collaborators doing complex 
problem solving do not have the same data [e.g. 4]. Full 
access also could promote joint attention and may help in 
the establishment of common ground more than 
applications that allow only shared views [20, 27].
Hypothesis 3: Access to a shared full-access visualization 
tool will encourage discussion between partners, and 
increase remote pair performance in complex problem 
solving beyond the performance of those using a 
visualization tool that supports unshared visualizations or 
shared but view-only visualizations.
METHOD
The design of this study was a single-level factorial, with 
four visualization conditions. Participants worked in pairs; 
pairs were randomly assigned to one of the four 
visualization conditions. The pairs were told they were
1228
