CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Do Visualizations Improve Synchronous
Remote Collaboration?
Aruna D. Balakrishnan, Susan R. Fussell, Sara Kiesler
Human Computer Interaction Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15232 USA
aruna@cs.cmu.edu
ABSTRACT
Information visualizations can improve collaborative 
problem solving, but this improvement may depend on 
whether visualizations promote communication. In an 
experiment on the effect of network visualizations, remote 
pairs worked synchronously to identify a serial killer. They 
discussed disparate evidence distributed across the pair 
using IM. Four conditions, respectively, offered (a) 
spreadsheet only (controls), (b) individual unshared 
visualizations, (c) view-only shared visualizations, and (d) a 
full-access shared visualization of all evidence. We 
examined collaborative performance, use of the 
visualization tool, and communication as a function of 
condition. All visualization conditions improved remote 
collaborators’ performance over the control condition. Full 
access to a shared visualization best facilitated remote 
collaboration by encouraging tool use and fostering 
discussion between the partners. Shared visualization 
without full access impaired performance somewhat and 
made communication even more vital to identifying the 
serial killer. This study provides direct evidence of 
visualization tool features and partner behavior that 
promote collaboration.
Author Keywords
CSCW, distributed work, empirical studies, information 
visualization, collaboration, communication.
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.3. Group and Organizational Interfaces: Computer- 
supported cooperative work, synchronous interaction.
INTRODUCTION
Henry Wallace had killed nine women when he was finally 
arrested in 1994 for shoplifting at a mall and released [36]. 
Wallace was finally identified as a serial killer when a
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00. 
detective noticed strangulation in deaths two weeks apart. 
The department called a meeting to share information, and 
detectives noted that the last two victims lived in the same 
apartment complex. As this case illustrates, significant 
breakthroughs in detective work often come about when 
someone notices and associates disparate and sometimes 
unlikely facts or events—colloquially, “connecting the 
dots.” Similarly, in intelligence analysis [17], business 
innovation [3], and scientific research [33], success may 
hinge on sharing and seeing linkages in previously 
unnoticed information.
Our focus is problem solving in which successful task 
performance, as in the example above, depends on whether 
individuals share information they have that is crucial to a 
group’s ability to “connect the dots.” We argue here that 
advances in computing that allow collaborators to visualize 
information open up new opportunities for collaborative 
problem solving that have failed in the past. For instance, in 
detective work, a shared map and database of offenses is 
feasible, potentially improving remote collaboration across 
investigators. In this paper, we address this possibility and 
examine the kinds of visualizations that foster collaborative 
problem solving.
Visualization techniques represent complex numerical and 
textual information in pictorial or graphical form and allow 
individuals or groups to perceive and explore patterns in 
data [1, 32, 41]. By removing the burden of mentally 
consolidating disparate information, such holistic 
representations of large amounts of data can help people 
spot anomalies, see new patterns, and improve their 
problem solving success [e.g., 21]. Information 
visualization tools can reduce task completion time and 
increase productivity on many information retrieval tasks 
and in data analysis [14, 34, 39]. Information visualizations 
available to a group can help promote feelings of 
community and foster discussion in “wiki” websites [40]. 
Visualizations also have costs—for individuals who must 
spend time learning how to manipulate them [2] and for 
groups, who can experience the tradeoffs involved in 
working alone versus being aware of others’ work. Much 
less is known about the impact of visualizations in 
collaborative problem solving, although, a few studies have
1227
