CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
According to a Student’s t test, pairs in the Shared Full 
Access Visualization condition talked significantly more 
about the network diagram (9% of IM lines) than did pairs 
in the other Visualization conditions. (5% of IM lines) or 
pairs (talking about the spreadsheet) in the No Visualization 
condition (&lt;1% of IM lines).
How was talking about the visualization relevant to 
identifying the serial killer? To examine this question, we 
looked at whether those who identified the serial killer 
talked differently with their partners than those who did not 
in the three Visualization conditions. (Because we did not 
manipulate communication directly, these are correlational 
analyses.) The analyses showed interesting relationships: 
Across the three Visualization conditions, controlling for 
condition, the higher the percentage of pair discussion 
about the network diagram, the higher was the percentage 
of discussion about the serial killer (F [1, 30] = 7.9, p &lt; .01, 
d = 1.1). The more pairs discussed the serial killer, the more 
likely they were to identify the serial killer (logistic 
regression Likelihood Ratio x2 = 6.2, p &lt; .05). These 
analyses point to the visualization as a contributor of 
solutions to the complex serial killer case.
DISCUSSION
We studied the impact of a shared visualization tool on 
difficult collaborative problem solving (overall, even after 
one hour, only 36% of pairs solved the case 
collaboratively). The visualization tool made a significant 
difference, improving not only individual performance, but 
also collaboration.
Although differences among the tools tended to be 
overshadowed by the positive impact of having any 
visualization at all, the Shared View-Only Visualization 
was comparatively unhelpful. That is, having full 
manipulable access to the shared visualization (Shared Full 
Access Visualization condition) encouraged pairs to use the 
tool and fostered more discussion and better performance— 
58% of the pairs solved the serial killer case. By contrast, 
when pairs had a tool that gave shared views but no ability 
to manipulate others’ data (Shared View-Only Visualization 
condition), there was a dip in performance—only 33.3% of 
pairs solved the serial killer case.
We wondered if the mere awareness of the partner’s 
visualization (but no ability to manipulate it) was a 
distraction to these pairs, explaining why mere awareness 
was worse than not seeing the partner’s view at all 
(Unshared Visualization condition). A decade ago, Gutwin 
and Greenberg [11] proposed that collaborative systems 
involve “mixed focus” whereby individuals must attend to 
their own work and to that of others. They analyzed a 
groupware concept map editor, showing that the tradeoffs 
of a shared view may include less individual flexibility and 
more attention to coordinating with others, detracting from 
accuracy.
Overall, we did not see that tradeoff. In the Visualization 
conditions, those who solved the problem actually spent
less time on task, whereas in the No Visualization 
condition, solving the case was correlated r = +.15 with 
time spent. Discussion was positively correlated with 
solving the case in the two best visualization conditions (r = 
.50) and negatively correlated with time spent problem 
solving (r = -.45). Talk was uncorrelated with solving the 
case in the less effective Shared View Only condition. We 
can only speculate, but possibly, when each member of the 
pair had his or her own visualization and could only stare at 
the other person’s diagram and manipulations, the tradeoff 
proposed by Gutwin and Greenberg prevailed. 
Alternatively, the two nonintegrated diagrams of data might 
have violated the “proximity compatibility” principle of 
display design [42], and confused pair members.
Our study is a step in the direction of understanding how 
visualizations can aid collaboration. Our nominal pair 
analysis (see Figure 3) showed that real collaboration was 
valuable on this task but we do not know exactly how pairs 
came to aid one another, for example, whether they formed 
a common mental model of the problem [8, 26] or whether 
they simply tried harder because the visualization was fun 
and motivating [40]. Future research will be needed to 
study these potential consequences of the use of 
collaborative visualization tools. How joint representations 
are created, perceived and given meaning is still being 
explored and understood as different from linguistic and 
gestural cognitive processing [5, 6, 44].
Limitations
This study cannot be generalized now to other genres of 
visualization tools, to other task types (such as decision 
making), or to other remote collaborative settings. For 
example, sharing information through IM may have 
introduced barriers to the effective flow of information or 
made visualizations particularly effective in a way they 
would not otherwise be effective. Previous studies have 
shown that IM provides an effective channel of 
communication between partners [e.g., 31] but an audio 
chat feature could help us understand the role of different 
channels in the use of visualization tools.
Participants were all given predrawn social network 
diagrams. One might argue that taking a more active role in 
creating the diagram would aid pairs in understanding their 
data [37]. However, a recent trend in using social network 
diagrams for analysis is to use diagrams automatically 
generated from an existing dataset. Oftentimes the datasets 
have millions of different records from which diagrams are 
produced, so a real challenge is how to engage users in 
helping to create them.
This study examined synchronous interactions. In 
distributed teams, colleagues often do not work 
simultaneously. Asynchronous collaborative visualizations 
can encourage to knowledge discovery [13]. Asynchronous 
communication and access to the information visualization 
tools would be most similar to our Unshared Visualization 
condition. Pairs did quite well in this condition (50%
1234
