CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 1. Screenshot of NetDraw, the network diagram tool used by participants.
members of the homicide unit of a local police department 
and had been assigned to a serial killer task force.
Participants
Ninety-four participants were recruited for a “Detective 
Mystery Study” (54 female, 40 male; 81% U.S. born; age 
range 18-64, median age approximately 22). Eighty percent 
of the participants were undergraduate or graduate students. 
Participants were paid $15 for their participation. They 
were told the experiment would last 1.5 hours.
Procedure
For the duration of the experiment, participants were seated 
apart, such that they could not see their partner or their 
partner’s workstation. Participants role-played a pair of 
detectives in Zone 5 of a police department, working 
remotely together to identify a possible serial killer in Zone 
5 and to complete reports on their findings.
The participants were trained on the visualization tool and 
the investigative task, given their detective task assignment, 
and left to work on the assignment for one hour. After an 
hour, or when the participants had completed their report, 
they completed an online survey to elicit their memory of 
the evidence about the serial killer. The experimenter then 
debriefed the participants.
Training. The participants practiced first on a comparatively 
simple problem involving the theft of a laptop computer 
from a college locker room. They read documents 
containing evidence relevant to four suspects in the theft 
and were asked to organize the data using a template that 
organized the evidence as to the motive, opportunity, and 
alibi of each suspect. Then they practiced on a more 
complex problem involving a rash of electronic equipment 
thefts. The case was constructed to give participants 
experience scanning and organizing information across
crimes. Participants also were shown how to use a timeline 
and geographic worksheet.
Participants also were trained how to use NetDraw (see 
Figure 1), the visualization tool adapted for this study, if 
they were assigned to one of the three visualization 
conditions. (Controls were trained on a spreadsheet that 
contained the same data.) A sample network diagram 
depicted the connections among the crimes in the second 
practice case. Participants were familiarized with the 
concepts of nodes and relationships, and they practiced 
using search and manipulating the diagram by location, 
time, and type of theft to give different perspectives on the 
crimes. Participants were encouraged to ask questions 
throughout the training. Training, on average, took 30 
minutes.
Complex Problem Solving Task
The pairs’ task was to identify a possible serial killer in 
Zone 5. Each participant was instructed to report any other 
important information that might help their department 
solve other cases.
Documents and reporting forms. Evidence related to the 
serial killer was scattered in 15 assorted documents 
summarizing 6 cold cases and one open homicide, which 
also functioned as a simple problem solving control task. 
The documents included witness and suspect interviews, 
and coroner’s reports. There were additional documents on 
crime statistics by police district zone, a map of the zone 
and adjacent zones, a bus route map, and a police 
department organizational chart. Participants also could use 
an MO (modus operandi) worksheet for recording dates, 
weapons, and other relevant evidence for each case, a 
suspect worksheet for recording different suspects, their 
connection to the victim, and given alibis, and a timeline 
worksheet for recording when and where each crime took 
place, intended to support inter-case linkages. Finally,
1229
