CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
participants were asked to complete two online reports on 
the results of their investigation, one on their serial killer 
analysis and another to report any other criminal activity 
they wanted to convey to the department.
All of the evidentiary documents and reports were available 
online and could be opened, searched, put in different or 
new folders, and manipulated freely. To insure that 
sufficient screen space was available to examine multiple 
documents at once, the participants each had access to two 
17” display monitors placed side by side. Also, the 
participants were given paper versions of the instructions 
and worksheets.
Dispersed Evidence. The serial killer was responsible for 
four of the six homicides in the cold cases folder. Eight 
pieces of evidence, six within the cold case files and one in 
the open homicide case file, could be linked to the serial 
killer: similar blunt force trauma injuries to the victims; 
victims killed in the evening after they returned from work; 
victims rode the same bus route; victims lived near the 
same bus route; offender worked at a local hospital on the 
bus route; offender had been identified on the bus (alibi for 
a homicide witness); offender had been seen carrying a tool 
box on the bus. Identifying the serial killer required 
conceptually linking these disparate pieces of evidence 
from different cases rather than simply eliminating a 
defined group of suspects in one current case folder.
The caseload and evidence for the serial killer were 
distributed evenly between each member of the pair. To 
accomplish this, the six unique cold cases and the 
documents of the current open homicide case were divided 
between the pair such that each member received 3 distinct 
cold cases and half of the documentation for the current 
homicide case.
The open homicide case concerned the murder of a woman 
named Darlene Raffield. To solve this homicide, 
participants only had to examine the documents in one 
folder, review the alibis of witnesses, and evaluate their 
motives and opportunities to commit the crime. If a pair 
spent time on this case, they would have less time to focus 
on the complex serial killer task. In pretesting, we found 
that individuals who spent more time on the Raffield 
homicide were less likely to identify the serial killer.
Communication. Participants were given an MSN Instant 
Messenger (IM) client and encouraged to use the client to 
talk with their partner. All IM conversations were recorded.
Visualization Independent Variable
Each pair was randomly assigned to one of four conditions, 
differing with respect to their access to a visualization tool. 
The tool enabled participants to see social and information 
network relationships in the data that linked names, places, 
events and objects, thereby providing a visual analysis 
perspective to identify the serial killer.
The tool used to create a social network diagram of all 
persons mentioned in the documents was NetDraw v.2, a
software application for drawing 2D social network 
diagrams available online from Analytic Technologies. 
Social network diagrams are aptly suited for complex 
problem solving of the kind we used. The evidence 
documents contained over 50 unique names and a diagram 
that represented how each person was connected to various 
other persons could serve to help participants categorize 
and group people, and to view how they might be 
connected across cases. At the start of a session, each 
participant (except for those in the control condition) 
received the software set up to show a predetermined social 
network diagram reflecting the relationships in the 
documents they had.
Figure 1 is a screen shot of the application. Within the 
diagram, each circle (a “node”) represented a person from 
the crimes and each line represented a relationship between 
two people. Victims were represented in red and other 
persons (such as witnesses and suspects) in blue. (Printed in 
black and white, victims are black and others are grey.) 
Thick lines denoted a strong tie, such as married people or 
coworkers. Thin lines denoted a weak tie, such as two 
people who happened to be at the same place at the same 
time (e.g., a waiter serving a restaurant customer or two 
people who rode the same bus route).
Participants could freely manipulate and move the nodes 
within the screen, but they could not change underlying 
relationships. Participants also could search or filter the 
diagrams based on a set of attributes to reveal people with 
common characteristics. Searchable attributes included 
police district zone affiliation, case affiliation, occupation, 
mode of transportation, time of crime, location of crime, 
weapon used to injure the victim, and the injured body part 
of the victim. For example, within the attribute weapon, the 
three options were handgun, blunt instrument, and poison. 
If handgun were selected, all victims who were injured by a 
handgun would be visible on the screen.
The four experimental conditions varied the degree of 
access that participants had to NetDraw.
No Visualization. In this control condition, the pairs did not 
have access to NetDraw. To ensure that they received the 
same information as did participants in the other conditions, 
they were given Microsoft Excel spreadsheets containing 
the same relationship information among the persons 
mentioned in the evidence documents. The names of these 
people were arranged to form a matrix. Relationships in the 
matrix were represented by 0, 1, or 2 scores, which 
reflected no relationship, a weak relationship (such as a 
witness), or a strong relationship (such as a family 
member), respectively. Each participant received a 
spreadsheet that contained the relationship data only for 
their own cases. The experimenter explained the use of the 
spreadsheet and the meaning of the numerical data.
Unshared Visualizations. Each member of the pair had 
access to NetDraw and a manipulable and searchable social
1230
