CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
	1	2	3	4	5	6	7
Collaborative Performance							
1. Pair identified serial killer (0 - 1)							
2. Time spent problem solving (minutes)	- .77 **						
Visualization Tool Use							
3. Visualization selected (min.)	.11	- .10					
4. Visualization tool active (min.) a	- .07	.14	.94 **				
Communication							
5. Total IM (# IM lines)	.21	- .26t	.00	- .34			
6. Discuss serial killer (# IM lines)	.27t	- .39 *	.14	- .30	.83 **		
7. Discuss Raffield homicide (# IM lines)	.08	- .01	- .01	- .04	.67 **	.21 t	
8. Discuss visualization (# IM lines)	.31 *	- .26	.41 **	- .10	.49 **	.62 **	.27 t
t p &lt; .10, *p &lt; .05, ** p &lt; .01
aVisualization conditions only
Table 1. Correlation of measures of pair performance, use of the visualization tool, and communication (N = 47).
network diagram of the data for the cases that they were 
given. They could not view their partner’s visualization. 
Shared View-Only Visualizations. As in the condition above, 
each member of the pair had access to NetDraw and a 
manipulable and searchable social network diagram of the 
data for the cases that they were given. Each participant 
also had a window within which they could view their 
partner’s social network diagram. They could not search or 
manipulate this diagram but could view how their partner 
acted upon it. The diagrams were shared using the Share 
Applications feature within MSN’s Messenger client.
Shared Full -Access Visualization. As in the Unshared 
Visualization and Shared View Only Visualization 
conditions, each member of the pair had access to NetDraw 
and a manipulable and searchable social network diagram 
of data but unlike the conditions described above, 
participants shared access to a network diagram that 
contained data from all the cases. This diagram could be 
manipulated and searched by both participants in the pair. 
This diagram was shared via a third computer using 
TightVNC, an open-source remote desktop software 
application.
Measures
We had four main sources of data: the final reports 
participants completed when their hour was up (or earlier if 
they had completed their analysis), an online posttest 
survey, IM logs, and WinWhatWhere files that recorded use 
of the visualization tool.
Individual and Collaborative Performance. Participants’ 
identification of the serial killer were culled from their 
written reports. The reports were coded for whether they 
named the serial killer, and whether they named the
Raffield offender. Mentioning the name of the correct 
offender as guilty or a primary suspect who should be 
arrested was counted as identification. We scored 
individuals but were mainly interested in the success of 
collaboration, so both members of the pair had to have 
named the serial killer for the pair to be coded as having 
collaborative successful performance.
Visualization Tool Use. Online activities were recorded via 
WinWhatWhere, a software tool that records the application 
a participant is using, the time spent with that window as 
the selected window, all keystrokes, and screenshots of the 
selected window. Due to resource constraints, one 
randomly selected participant within each pair was 
recorded. To estimate tool use, we calculated the total 
amount of time these participants had the visualization tool 
as the selected window. Active use was highly correlated 
with visualization window selection (see Table 1). In 
analyses, the total minutes the tool was selected and was 
active were log transformed to adjust for skewness.
Communication. We calculated how much conversation 
occurred between members of a pair by counting the total 
number of IM lines they exchanged during a session. An 
IM line refers to each new line within the recorded IM logs.
Participants’ attention to different topics was coded in the 
IM conversations. IM logs were coded by line for whether 
the participants were discussing the serial killer task, 
whether they were discussing the Raffield homicide, and 
whether they were referring to the social network diagram 
(See Table 2 for the coding scheme). IM was coded to be 
related to the serial killer task if the line clearly showed the 
participants talking about or working on searching for 
patterns of a serial killer, for example, “Here we have
Topic	Definition	Example
Serial killer task	Pertains to solving the serial killer task or evidence pointing to the serial killer.	“I see a connection between 2 of my cold cases; they both involve a blunt object.”
Raffield homicide	Discussion pertaining to solving the Raffield homicide.	“I think the person who poisoned Darlene is Wade.”
Visualization	References the visualization tool or the visualization.	“My diagram says that Wayne is involved in the Raffield case.”
		“Move those two out of the way.”
Table 2. Conversational coding scheme.
1231
