CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
of megapixels over the years. The user records the finding 
in note 2 (see figure 6(2)) and links the note to the current 
visualization state in the navigation view. Subsequently, the 
user compares the zoom-ratio, eyepiece and download in-
terface attributes against year by changing the scatterplot y- 
axis. Notes 3, 4 and 5 are the user’s findings; each of these 
notes is linked to the corresponding visualization state in the 
navigation view. The user then checks whether the selected 
cameras have internal memory and records the findings in 
note 6. The user completes the mind map by connecting 
notes 2, 3 and 4 with note 1, and note 6 with note 5 using the 
connector line with arrow.
Based on the trend analysis and the user’s own knowledge 
about the digital camera market, the user defines require-
ments for selecting a camera. The user revisits the visualiza-
tion states by clicking on the notes recorded in the knowl-
edge view to gain an overview of his analysis. The user 
records those requirements in note 7. In this case, the user 
is looking for a recent camera from manufacturers such as 
Canon, Nikon, and Sony with 7 megapixels and with a dig-
ital TTL (through-the-lens) eyepiece. The user revisits the 
visualization state where the cameras with digital TTL were 
selected by clicking on note 4. Then the user changes the 
size encoding to the megapixels attribute. This creates a new 
branch in the navigation view (see figure 6(8)).
Using the dynamic query interface, the user selects those 
manufacturers recorded in note 7 and sets the megapixels 
attribute range to above 7 megapixels. Three cameras match 
the requirements. The user records this finding in note 9. 
The user plots the zoom-ratio attribute against year. Then the 
user picks the most recent camera with high zoom-ratio sat-
isfying the requirements. The scatterplot in the figure shows 
this state (see figure 6(f)). The user records this state with 
note 10. The user connects notes 4 and 9, and 9 and 10 to 
indicate the selection process. The user then groups notes 7, 
9 and 10 used for the camera selection (see figure 6(10)).
This use case demonstrated how a user combined both the in-
formation foraging loop and sensemaking loop opportunisti-
cally to reason about the camera dataset and select cameras. 
This combination was facilitated by revisiting the visualiza-
tion states from the externalized the analysis artifacts in the 
knowledge view and revising them. Thus, using the data, 
navigation and knowledge views, the whole exploration pro-
cess can be revisited, revised, and presented to others along 
with the synthesized information.
USER STUDY
We conducted a user study to understand the support of-
fered by the Aruvi prototype to the analytical reasoning pro-
cess. The user experiment focused on the quality of results 
achieved using the Aruvi prototype. Further, the user re-
quirements were captured for adding new features and for 
enhancing the existing features of the Aruvi prototype to im-
prove the analysis process.
We invited analysts from different domains to participate in 
the user study. Four analysts participated in the final user
study. The analysts came up with their own datasets. Ana-
lyst 1, a usability researcher, was interested in understanding 
the qualitative output of a usability analysis. The analyst was 
using a scatterplot to generate hypotheses on the data and 
perform an initial assessment to decide on the choice of sta-
tistical analysis method to draw clear conclusions. Analyst 
2, a software quality consultant, was interested in the cor-
relation between the software metrics of a software project 
to assess the software maintainability and design test cases. 
The analyst so far was using a pivot table [19] to arrange and 
sort the columns for comparison. Analyst 3, a software qual-
ity modeling researcher, was interested in identifying the 
outliers and build a case for software analysis based on the 
software metrics data of a software project. Analyst 4, an ur-
ban planning researcher, was interested in the chronological 
buildings characterization for a city in India to understand 
how the buildings were developed and their attributes were 
shaped.
The study had three steps: a training session, an exploration 
session and an interview with the analyst. Following the 
training session, the analysts were asked to perform an anal-
ysis of their own dataset using the Aruvi prototype without 
any time limit. Usage characteristics were captured while 
the analysts performed the analysis. After the exploration 
session, each analyst was interviewed to reflect on the fol-
lowing:
•	Which features of the Aruvi prototype made a difference 
in their analysis process?
•	Why were those features important for them?
•	Express opinions on the prototype in general, for instance, 
the positive and negative aspects of it.
Further, if there were any interesting usage patterns observed 
during the exploration sessions, the analyst was asked to ex-
plain the intention of such usage behavior.
Discussion
Analysts agreed that the knowledge view helped to clearly 
see the analysis process by building a bridge between visu-
alization and knowledge gained. Analysts found recording 
the findings, and linking them to the visualizations and orga-
nizing them were very important for their analysis process, 
and the use of the Aruvi prototype improved their quality 
of results. The knowledge view helped to visualize all possi-
bilities, for instance, the analyst’s hypotheses and assertions, 
and restructure the analysis to build a case. The analysts also 
recorded their free thoughts apart from the analysis artifacts 
linked with visualizations. Analyst 1 said “the knowledge 
view is simple and easy to use for grouping hypotheses, and 
for quickly constructing and visualizing the structure of all 
hypotheses”. Analyst 2 said “Aruvi is really cool to explore 
the software metrics rapidly and it will help me create an 
optimal method for analyzing the data in the future”. Ana-
lysts 2 and 4 modified few links between visualization and 
analysis artifacts when there were better evidence available 
in the visualization or some contradictions to their claims 
were found in the visualization (see unlink visualization and
1243
