CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
each analyst. Analyst 1 used mostly dynamic query and tog-
gle show selected interfaces; while other analysts predomi-
nantly changed axes. The analysts commented that size en-
coding is useful. Analyst 4 used size coding based on ob-
ject density for the entire analysis. Analyst 2 and 3 used 
selection to track software modules’ behavior while com-
paring various different attributes. Analyst 2 also suggested 
adding trend lines to the scatterplot, and displaying statis-
tical information such as x and y axes averages, and cor-
relation coefficient of the current selection against the en-
tire dataset. Currently the scatterplot is the only visualiza-
tion supported in the prototype. The analysts were able to 
discover many interesting facts using scatterplot. However, 
they also expressed a need for some other visualizations. 
Analyst 1 asked for a scatterplot matrix for simultaneously 
plotting different datasets. Analysts 2 and 3 said linking 
scatterplot visualization to an UML diagram would help them 
to have an overview of the architecture of the software. An-
alyst 4 asked for a map visualization to get a spatial context 
of a pattern seen in the scatterplot. In the future, we plan to 
support multiple visualizations in the prototype.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented an information visualization frame-
work that supports the analytical reasoning process. The 
analytical reasoning is facilitated by extending visualization 
support to externalize the mental models and link the analy-
sis artifacts to the visualizations. It also enables the analysts 
to revisit the visualization states to review and validate the 
findings, and reuse it to look for alternate views. Finally, 
the analyst can organize the externalized analysis artifacts to 
build a case.
To support the reasoning process, the information visualiza-
tion framework consists of three fundamental views: data 
view; knowledge view; and navigation view, and a history 
tracking mechanism. Four analysts participated in a user 
study with their own datasets. The perceived usefulness of 
the Aruvi prototype was discussed based on the usage pat-
tern of the exploration sessions and the interviews conducted 
with the analysts. Analysts found that recording the find-
ings, and linking them to the visualizations and organizing 
them were very important for their analysis process. Ana-
lysts agreed that the use of the Aruvi prototype improved the 
quality of their results.
FUTURE WORK
The user study also resulted in a list for future work such as 
template extraction from the navigation view, highlighting 
visualization states in the navigation view based on type of 
specification change, text search in the knowledge view and 
a number of minor changes.
If the exploration session is long, history tree may not help 
the user to review the exploration process anymore. This is 
an interesting meta-visualization challenge. It is important 
to create simple and intuitive visual representations as a part 
of navigation view for getting an overview and revision of 
the exploration process. Variable granularity of the history 
presentation is one important aspect here.
In future, we plan to add a data management suite to sup-
port multiple data sources and different data models. In re-
ality, analysts are often confronted with inputs from different 
sources such as text, videos, and automatic reasoning algo-
rithms, to name a few. Visual analytics research considers 
interactive visualization as glue for combining various com-
putational data analysis techniques to support the analytical 
reasoning process. In principle, our framework should ac-
commodate these techniques in the data view and we will 
investigate how to integrate these.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is done under the Expression of Interest project. 
The project is supported by the VIEW programme of the 
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) un-
der research grant no. 643.100.502. We thank the review-
ers and Hannes Pretorius for their insightful comments. We 
thank Jean-Bernard Martens for his guidance on conducting 
the user study. We also thank the analysts who participated 
in the user study.
REFERENCES
1. G. D. Abowd and A. J. Dix. Giving undo attention. 
Interacting with Computers, 4(3):317–342, 1992.
2. M. J. Bates. Design of browsing and berrypicking 
techniques for the online search interface. Online 
Review, 13:407–424, 1989.
3. M. I. Bauer and J. J. Laird. How diagrams can improve 
reasoning. Psychological Science, 4(6):372–378, 1993.
4. L. Bavoil, S. Callahan, P. Crossno, J. Freire,
C. Scheidegger, C. Silva, and H. Vo. Vistrails: Enabling 
interactive, multiple-view visualizations. In
Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2005 conference, 
pages 135–142. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2005.
5. J. R. Beech and A. M. Colley, editors. Cognitive 
Approaches to Reading, chapter Reading and working 
memory, pages 57–86. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Limited, 
1987.
6. G. D. Bhatt. Organizing knowledge in the knowledge 
development cycle. Journal of Knowledge
Management, 4(1):15–26, 2000.
7. K. Brodlie, L. Brankin, G. Banecki, A. Gay, A. Poon, 
and H. Wright. GRASPARC - a problem solving 
environment integrating computation and visualization. 
In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 1993 conference, 
pages 102–109. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1993.
8. R. A. Burkhard. Knowledge and Information 
Visualization, volume 3426/2005 of Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, chapter Towards a Framework and a 
Model for Knowledge Visualization: Synergies 
Between Information and Knowledge Visualization, 
pages 238–255. Springer, 2005.
9. T. Buzan and B. Buzan. The Mind Map Book: How to 
Use Radiant Thinking to Maximize Your Brain’s 
Untapped Potential. Penguin Books, 1993.
1245
