CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
analysis artifacts in figure 7). Analysts 2, 3 and 4 rearranged 
and grouped the findings at the end of the analysis to build 
cases based on the dataset. However, Analyst 1 rearranged 
the analysis artifacts quite often in the middle of the anal-
ysis (see Arrange analysis artifacts in figure 7).The analyst 
explained that rearranging helped to restructure the analysis 
process to look for clear conclusions.
Analyst 1 mainly used notes in the knowledge view to re-
visit a particular visualization state (see revisit pattern of an-
alyst 1 in figure 8) and reused it to refine the hypotheses (see 
branching pattern of Analyst 1 in figure 8)). The analyst 
organized key visualization states by rearranging the corre-
sponding notes into a group and switched between them to 
compare different visualization states. However, the analyst 
expressed that side by side comparison will be more effec-
tive than switching between the states.
Analyst 4 could clearly see in the navigation view that the 
analysis was performed in three different lines of thought 
(see branching in figure 8). For analyst 2, the sequence 
in the navigation view was important, since it represents a 
workflow. The analyst wanted to rearrange and purge cer-
tain visualization states in the navigation view to create an 
optimum analysis workflow template. This is particularly 
important for the analyst since this analysis has to be re-
peated for different datasets quite often. Since the history 
tracking module captures the dataset and visualization spec-
ification of the visualization states separately, the workflow 
template extraction is possible. This is a promising use case 
for reusing visualization exploration processes.
Figure 7. Knowledge externalization and organization pattern
Figure 8. Revisit and reuse pattern
Analyst 3 revisited the visualization states to review the anal-
ysis. The analyst expressed difficulties in finding the rele-
vant notes in the knowledge view and suggested a text based 
search to locate the notes within the knowledge view. The 
analyst felt that the branching in the history tree showed 
the reuse pattern but it did not clearly bring out his implicit 
thought process. The analyst expressed the requirement to 
have visualization states in the navigation view grouped and 
highlighted based on changes in a particular interaction in-
terface. For instance, the analyst wanted to group visual-
ization states between x-axis changes in the scatterplot and 
highlight them. This facility would enable analysts to play 
around with different groupings of interaction interfaces to 
extract the implicit thought process in the navigation struc-
ture. This is particularly important when an analysis is con-
tinued at different times, and the analyst wants to get an 
overview of the analysis.
For analyst 1, the revisit from the knowledge view was easier 
and more meaningful than from the navigation view. How-
ever, the analyst used the navigation view to back track re-
cent visualization states. The analyst also recorded notes on 
the revisited nodes. The same usage pattern was also ob-
served for other analysts (see revisit using history tree and 
keyboard in figure 8). It supports the fact that knowledge 
creation is an unsystematic process; and the analyst wants to 
back track to see what has happened in the recent history to 
affirm a thought. Since the history tracking mechanism cap-
tures the visualization states automatically, the analyst can 
get access to the exhaustive list of visualization states via 
the navigation view. On the other hand, the knowledge view 
enables the analyst to record visualization states selectively. 
Hence, the analysts can opportunistically use the navigation 
view and knowledge view to revisit the visualization states 
for reviewing and validating their findings, and reusing the 
visualization to look for alternate views. Analysts 1, 2 and 
4 expressed a need for export of the output of knowledge 
view and visualizations as a report or presentation file. The 
analysts appreciated the possibility to save and restore their 
analysis.
Figure 9. Interaction pattern in the data view (scatterplot with dynamic 
query interface)
The analysts were satisfied with the fairly straightforward 
visualization offered. They commented that the interactive 
scatterplot visualization improved their analysis process. The 
analysts expressed that it was quite handy since they need 
not look back into the data to modify the data selection and 
visualize it. Figure 9 summarizes the usage pattern of the 
scatterplot with dynamic query in the data view. The usage 
pattern varied based on the different analysis processes of
1244
