CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
facilitated by various interactions such as dynamic query 
[30], overview + detail [28], direct manipulation [11], focus 
+ context [15] and so on. These interactions enable the ana-
lyst to view the data in different ways during the exploration 
process. The exploration evolves based on the analyst’s prior 
knowledge, and clues or findings in each visualization state. 
It is similar to berrypicking [2] in which the evolution of the 
navigation is opportunistic, and information is gathered in 
bits and pieces. In this context, the knowledge creation pro-
cess is unsystematic, continuously evolving and emergent 
[6]. Hence, the analyst must be aware of what has been done 
and found during the exploration process to perform effec-
tive reasoning.
During data analysis, the user looks for evidence from the 
data to construct, confirm or contradict a claim. Based on 
the relations that the evidence have with the data in context 
of the analysis’ purpose, the user’s mind constructs men-
tal models of the information structure [20]. In the context 
of interactive information visualization, the evidence can be 
found in terms of patterns or outliers by changing views and 
data specifications. If the argumentation process is complex, 
it is important to externalize the evidence and causal links 
between them for effective reasoning [25].
To further understand the requirements for the analytical rea-
soning process in information visualization, we looked at 
traditional well-founded reasoning theories. Johnson-Laird 
and Byrne [21] observed that there are three basic stages in 
different reasoning theories such as spatial reasoning, propo-
sitional inferences, syllogisms, and so forth. They are model 
construction, revision and falsification. In the first stage, the 
argument premises are understood and mental models are 
constructed based on the premises’ content. In the second 
stage, the model is scanned to formulate a putative conclu-
sion. In the third stage, alternate models are searched for 
to contradict the putative conclusion. If there are no alter-
nate models, the conclusion is accepted; otherwise, the an-
alyst returns to the second stage to assert the validity of the 
other conclusions against the alternate models. Therefore, 
it is clear that externalization of the mental models is not 
enough to support the entire reasoning process. The other 
two analytical reasoning phases — revision and falsification 
— have to also be supported.
Further, it is important to communicate what has been found 
during the exploration process to others for a collaborative 
decision making process. Viegas and Wattenberg strong ar-
guments for communicating insights along with visualiza-
tion to others through their communication-minded visual-
ization framework [35]. Further design considerations for 
sharing insights in collaborative visual analytics are discussed 
by Heer and Agarwal [17].
From the above discussion, we set out the following require-
ments for the analytical reasoning process in information vi-
sualization. The user has to be enabled to:
1. externalize the analysis artifacts such as evidence, hypothe-
ses, assertions and causal links between them;
2. organize the analysis artifacts and the causal links between 
them to support or contradict a claim;
3. review and revise the exploration process;
4. link externalized analysis artifacts and visualizations to 
support these;
5. present his findings along with his analysis process to oth-
ers.
In summary, for effective reasoning process, the user must 
have an overview of what has been done and found. There-
fore, to keep track of the exploration process and insights, a 
history tracking mechanism and a knowledge externalization 
mechanism respectively are essential. Hence, to support the 
analytical reasoning process in information visualization, a 
framework with both a history tracking mechanism and a 
knowledge externalization mechanism is required.
RELATED WORK
We now present previous work in history tracking and in 
knowledge externalization.
History Tracking
A common approach to automatically record the exploration 
process is to capture low-level user actions such as mouse 
events, keyboard events and to provide a linear history. The 
user can revisit the linear history using an undo-redo mech-
anism. It is used for recovery and reversal operations [1]. 
After backtracking, on performance of a new action by the 
user, the recent forward actions are deleted. Hence, the com-
plete navigation is not captured.
Another approach is to use a tree structure to capture the ex-
ploration process. In GRASPARC [7], a problem solving 
framework which integrates the computation and visualiza-
tion process, a history tree is used to model the search for an 
optimal solution to numerical simulations. The nodes of the 
history tree hold snapshots of the parameters, raw data and 
image representation at various stages of the analysis, and 
edges represent the user navigation. It allows the user to se-
lect a snapshot as a new branch point, or to select a sequence 
of snapshots for visualization.
In image-graphs [24], a graph representation is used to cap-
ture the parameter settings during visual data exploration. 
The edges hold parameters, nodes display the resulting im-
ages. The user can perform operations on the edges and 
nodes to produce new visualizations. Since the image graph 
is a parameter-based interface, the rate of growth of param-
eter settings makes it difficult to display and compare re-
sulting images. A branching time model is used in Visage 
[13] to capture direct manipulation tasks during visual data 
exploration. A time-travel interface is used to visualize the 
branching time model that allows the user to revisit the anal-
ysis and reuse a sequence of direct manipulations on a new 
branch timeline.
In scientific visualization, there is a growing interest in the 
management of the scientific data and visualization process.
1238
