Psychologically Targeted Persuasive Advertising and
Product Information in E-Commerce
Timo Saari
M.I.N.D. Lab/CKIR, Helsinki School of
Economics and Helsinki Institute for
Information Technology1
+358 50 373 2234
saari@hkkk.fi
Marko Turpeinen
Helsinki Institute for Information
Technology1
+358 50 64 084
marko.turpeinen@hiit.fi
1
Tammasaarenkatu 3, 00180, Helsinki, Finland
Niklas Ravaja
M.I.N.D. Lab/CKIR
Helsinki School of Economics1
+358 9 431 38664
ravaja@hkkk.fi
Kari Kallinen
M.I.N.D. Lab/CKIR
Helsinki School of Economics1
+358 9 4313 8697
kallinen@hkkk.fi
Jari Laarni
M.I.N.D. Lab/CKIR
Helsinki School of Economics1
+358 9 4313 8381
laarni@hkkk.fi
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we describe a framework for a personalization
system to systematically induce desired emotion and attention
related states and promote information processing in viewers of
online advertising and e-commerce product information.
Psychological Customization entails personalization of the way of
presenting information (user interface, visual layouts, modalities,
structures) per user to create desired transient psychological
effects and states, such as emotion, attention, involvement,
presence, persuasion and learning. Conceptual foundations and
empiric evidence for the approach are presented.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.1.2 [User/machine systems]: Human factors, human
information processing, software psychology
General Terms
Performance, Design, Human Factors, Theory
Keywords
E-commerce, advertising, personalization emotion, persuasion.
1. INTRODUCTION
Advertising and presentation of product information is done both
to inform people about new products and services and to persuade
them into buying them. Persuasion can be thought of as
influencing peoples´ attitudes and behavior. Advertising done in a
mass medium, such as television or magazines can be segmented
to desired audiences. However, there is a possibility to
personalize or mass customize advertising in the internet and for
instance in mobile phones. Similarly, in the internet also product
information of various items for sale can be personalized to
desired users. These two areas are introduced here together as
they represent interesting opportunities for personalization.
Consequently, personalization may turn out to be an important
driver for future commercial applications and services in a one-to-
one world in which automatic and intelligent systems tailor the
interactions of users, contexts and systems in real-time. This
paper describes the foundations of information personalization
systems that may facilitate desired psychological states in
individual users of internet based advertising and product
information presentation in e-commerce thereby creating
psychologically targeted messages for users of such systems. It is
preliminarily hypothesized that such personalization may be one
way to more efficient persuasion.
When perceiving information via media and communications
technologies users have a feeling of presence. In presence, the
mediated information becomes the focused object of perception,
while the immediate, external context, including the technological
device, fades into the background [8, 36, 37]. Empirical studies
show that information experienced in presence has real
psychological effects on perceivers, such as emotional responses
based on the events described or cognitive processing and
learning from the events [see 51]. It is likely that perceivers of
advertisements and product information experience presence that
may lead to various psychological effects. For instance, an
attitude may be hold with greater confidence the stronger the
presence experience.
Personalization and customization entails the automatic or semi-
automatic adaptation of information per user in an intelligent way
with information technology [see 33, 68]. One may also vary the
form of information (modality for instance) per user profile,
which may systematically produce, amplify, or shade different
psychological effects [56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
ICEC'04, Sixth International Conference on Electronic Commerce
Edited by: Marijn Janssen, Henk G. Sol, and René W. Wagenaar
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-930-6/04/10…$5.00
245245
2. PSYCHOLOGICAL CUSTOMIZATION
2.1 Mind-Based Technologies
Media- and communication technologies as special cases of
information technology may be considered as consisting of three
layers [6]. At the bottom is a physical layer that includes the
physical technological device and the connection channel that is
used to transmit communication signals. In the middle is a code
layer that consists of the protocols and software that make the
physical layer run. At the top is a content layer that consists of
multimodal information. The content layer includes both the
substance and the form of multimedia content [7, 56]. Substance
refers to the core message of the information. Form implies
aesthetic and expressive ways of organizing the substance, such
as using different modalities and structures of information [56].
With the possibility of real-time customization and adaptation of
information for different perceivers it is hypothesized that one
may vary the form of information within some limits per the same
substance of information. For instance, the same substance can be
expressed in different modalities, or with different ways of
interaction with the user and technology. This may produce a
certain psychological effect in some perceivers; or shade or
amplify a certain effect. In Figure 1 the interaction of media and
communications technology and the user in context with certain
types of tasks is seen as producing transient psychological effects,
thereby creating various “archetypal technologies” that
systematically facilitate desired user experiences [see 55, 56].
Media and communication technology is divided into the
physical, code and content layers. The user is seen as consisting
of various different psychological profiles, such as individual
differences related to cognitive style, personality, cognitive
ability, previous knowledge (mental models related to task) and
other differences, such as pre-existing mood. [49, 56, 58, 59]
Media- and communication technologies may be called Mind-
Based if they simultaneously take into account the interaction of
three different key components: i) the individual differences
and/or user segment differences of perceptual processing and
sense making ii) the elements and factors inherent in information
and technology that may produce psychological effects (physical,
code and content layers), and iii) the consequent transient
psychological effects emerging based on perception and
processing of information at the level of each individual. [see 63]
This definition can be extended to include both context and at
least short-term behavioral consequences. Regarding context, a
Mind-Based system may alter its functionalities depending on
type of task of the user, physical location, social situation or other
ad-hoc situational factors that may have a psychological impact.
Behavioral consequences of using a Mind-Based system may be
thought of especially in the case of persuasion as facilitating
desired instant behaviors such as impulse buying. Of course, if a
Mind-Based system builds a positive image and schema of a
product over longer periods of time reflected in product and brand
awareness that may the influence user behaviors later on.
As the task of capturing and predicting users´ psychological state
in real time is highly complex, one possible realization for
capturing users´ psychological state is to have the user linked to a
sufficient number of measurement channels of various i)
psychophysiological signals (EEG, EMG, GSR, cardiovascular
activity, other), ii) eye-based measures (eye blinks, pupil dilation,
eye movements) and iii) behavioral measures (response speed,
response quality, voice pitch analysis etc.). An index based on
these signals then would verify to the system whether a desired
psychological effect has been realized.
Fig. 1. Mind-Based Technologies as a framework for
producing psychological effects. Adapted from [56].
Another approach would be to conduct a large number of user
studies on certain tasks and contexts with certain user groups,
psychological profiles and content-form variations and measure
various psychological effects as objectively as possible. Here,
both subjective methods (questionnaires and interviews) and
objective measures (psychophysiological measures or eye-based
methods) may be used as well interviews [for a review on the use
of psychophysiological methods in media research, see 46]. This
would constitute a database of design-rules for automatic
adaptations of information per user profile to create similar effects
in highly similar situations with real applications. Naturally, a
hybrid approach would combine both of these methods for
capturing and facilitating the users´ likely psychological state.
Capturing context and short-term user behavior is a challenge.
Computational approach to context utilizes a mass of sensors that
detect various signals in an environment. AI-based software then
massively computes from the signal flow significant events either
directly or with the help of some simplifying rules and algorithms.
Capturing user behavior in context is easier if the user is using an
internet browser to buy an item, for instance. In this case action,
or behavior can be captured by the system as the user clicks his
mouse to buy an item. If the user is wondering around in a
supermarket with a mobile phone that presented a persuasive
message to buy the item on aisle 7 it may be difficult to verify this
other than cross-reference his checkout bill with the displayed
adverts inside the store. However, it is beyond the scope of this
paper to fully elaborate on the contextual and behavioral
dimensions of Mind-Based Technologies.
2.2 Description of a Psychological
Customization System
Psychological Customization is one possible way of
implementing of Mind-Based Technologies in system design. It
can be applied to various areas of HCI, such as Augmentation
Systems (augmented and context sensitive financial news),
Notification Systems (alerts that mobilize a suitable amount of
attention per task or context of use), Affective Computing
(emotionally adapted games), Collaborative Filtering (group-
focused information presentation), Persuasive Technology
Media and Communications
Technology
Substance
Form
- modalities
- visual layout
- structure
- other
Type of device
Ways of interaction
User interface
Technologies influencing
subjective experience
-Emotion Technologies
-Flow Technologies
-Presence Technologies
Technologies influencing
subjective experience
-Emotion Technologies
-Flow Technologies
-Presence Technologies
Technologies influencing
change of knowledge
- Knowledge Technologies
Technologies influencing
change of knowledge
- Knowledge Technologies
Mind
Psychological
profiles
- cognitive style
- personality
- mental models
- other
Results of
processing
Results of
processing
Physical
Content
Code
Context and Task
246246
(advertising for persuasion, e-commerce persuasion), Computer
Mediated Social Interaction Systems (collaborative work, social
content creation templates), Messaging Systems (emotionally
adapted mobile multimedia messaging and email) and
Contextually Sensitive Services (psychologically efficient
adaptation of presentation of information sensitive to physical,
social or situational context, such as available menus to control a
physical space, available information related to a particular
situation, such as social interaction or city navigation with a
mobile device).
It can be hypothesized that the selection and manipulation of
substance of information takes place through the technologies of
the various application areas of Psychological Customization.
Underlying the application areas is a basic technology layer for
customizing design. This implies that within some limits one may
automatically vary the form of information per a certain category
of substance of information. The design space for Psychological
Customization is formed in the interaction of a particular
application area and the possibilities of the technical
implementation of automated design variation Initially,
Psychological Customization includes modeling of individuals,
groups, and communities to create psychological profiles and
other profiles based on which customization may be conducted. In
addition, a database of design rules is needed to define the desired
cognitive and emotional effects for different types of profiles.
Once these components are in place, content management
technologies can be extended to cover variations of form and
substance of information based on psychological profiles and
design rules to create the desired psychological effects. [see 63]
At the technically more concrete level, a Psychological
Customization System is a new form of middleware between
applications, services, content management systems and
databases. It provides an interface for designing desired
psychological effects and user experiences for individual users or
user groups. The most popular framework for building customized
Web-based applications is Java 2 Enterprise Edition. J2EE-based
implementation of the Psychological Customization System for
Web-based applications is depicted in Figure 2. The basic J2EE
three-tiered architecture consisting of databases, application
servers, and presentation servers has been extended with three
middleware layers: content management layer, customer
relationship management layer, and psychological customization
layer. The profiles of the users and the communities are available
in the profile repository. [see 69]
The Content Management System is used to define and manage
the content repositories. This typically is based on metadata
descriptions of the content assets. The metadata of the content
repositories is matched against the user and community profiles
by the Customer Relationship Management (CRM) system. The
CRM system includes tools for managing the logic behind
content, application and service customization. Rules can be
simple matching rules or more complex rule sets. A special case
of a rule set are scenarios, which are rule sets involving sequences
of the interactions on the Web site. The Customer Relationship
Management layer also includes functionality for user and
community modeling. This layer can also perform automated
customer data analysis, such as user clustering. [see 69]
The Psychological Customization System layer performs the
optimization of the form of the content as selected by the
Customer Relationship Management layer. This functionality can
be considered similar to the device adaptation by using content
transformation rules (for example XSL-T). In the case of the
psychological customization, the transformation rules are
produced based on the design rules for content presentation
variation and the contents of the psychological profile of the user.
After this optimization, the content is passed to the Web
presentation layer.
Community
Profiles
Content
Rules and
Scenarios
Application Server
User
User
UserUser
profile
Community
profile
Content
Management
System
Customer
Relationship
Management
Web Presentation Layer
Psychological
Customization
System
Figure 2. J2EE implementation of the Psychological
Customization System [69]
Even though a working prototype of Psychological Customization
has not been built yet, several empirical studies support the
feasibility of a user-experience driven system that matches the
form of information to the psychologically relevant properties and
other profile factors of individual users and user groups.
For instance, there are individual differences in cognitive
processes such as attention, working memory capacity, general
intelligence, perceptual-motor skills and language abilities. These
individual differences have a considerable effect on computer-
based performance and may product sometimes quite large
variance in the intensity or type of psychological effects, such as
depth of learning, positive emotion, persuasion, presence, social
presence and other types of psychological states and effects as
well as consequent behavior [13, 14, 18, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61,
62, 63, 70].
There is considerable evidence in literature and in our own
experimental research that varying the form of information, such
as modality, layouts, background colors, text types, emotionality
of the message, audio characteristics, presence of image motion
and subliminality creates for instance emotional, cognitive and
attentional effects [9, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 48]. Some
of these effects are produced in interaction with individual
differences, such as cognitive style, personality, age and gender
[21, 46, 47], or pre-existing mood [49]. The role of hardware
should not be neglected. A device with a large screen or a
247247
portable device with smaller screen with user-changeable covers
may also influence the emerging effects [e.g. 30].
Table 1. Key factors influencing psychological effects.
Adapted from [56].
Layer of
technology
Key factors
Physical Hardware
- large or small vs. human scale
- mobile or immobile
- close or far from body (intimate-
personal-social distance)
Interaction
- degree of user vs. system
control and proactivity through
user interface
Code
Visual-functional aspects
- way of presenting controls in an
interface visually and functionally
Substance
- the essence of the event
described
- type of substance
(factual/imaginary; genre, other)
- narrative techniques used by
authors
Content
Form
1. Modalities
- text, video, audio, graphics,
animation, etc.
2. Visual layout
- ways of presenting various shapes,
colours, font types, groupings and
other relationships or expressive
properties of visual representations
- ways of integrating modalities into
the user interface
3. Structure
- ways of presenting modalities,
visual layout and other elements of
form and their relationships over time
- linear and/or non-linear
structure (sequential vs.
parallel; narrative
techniques,
hypertextuality)
This empiric evidence partly validates the possibility for
Psychological Customization Systems at least with mobile
devices and user interface prototypes used in our own research.
Typical experiments we have conducted on the influence of form
of information on psychological effects have included such
manipulations as animation and movement (for orientation
response), fonts of text, layout of text, background colors of text,
user interface navigation element shapes (round vs. sharp), user
interface layout directions, adding background music to reading
text, use of subliminal affective priming in the user interface
(emotionally loaded faces) and use of different modalities, for
instance. Table 1 addresses the key factors that may influence
psychological effects of processing mediated information.
3. APPLICATION AREAS
3.1 Persuasion as a Psychological Effect
The focus of this paper is on persuasion in advertising and
product information presentation in e-commerce. The key
application area to realize this with Psychological Customization
is Persuasive Technology. It refers to human-computer interaction
in which there is an underlying goal to non-coercively change the
attitudes, motivation and/or behavior of the user [15, 16]. For
instance, one may motivate users to quit smoking via motivating
games.
However, it is clear that how much people allocate resources to
processing a particular persuasive message has to be taken into
account. Further, it may be that there is not so much freedom to
manipulate persuasive messages to produce effects and the effects
themselves may be sometimes small. Despite this, empiric
evidence in personalization, as discussed, suggests that
statistically significant effects perhaps in the range of a few
percentages to even tens of percents exist in the area of
Psychological Customization, such as emotion, presence and
efficiency of information processing. Hence, it can be at least
preliminarily assumed that with persuasion similar level effects
may be achievable also.
Persuasion in human computer interaction has been researched
from the point of view of seeing computers as tools (increasing
capabilities of the user), as a medium (providing experiences) and
as a social actor (creating a relationship) [15, 16]. For the
purposes of this article, technology used in Psychological
Customization for presentation of e-commerce product
information and online advertising is seen mostly as a medium
and partly as a social actor. How then to model and explain
persuasion in more detail? Evidently no universal theory of what
is the process of persuasion has been created yet [17].
Candidates for explaining and modeling persuasion include i)
learning theory (operant conditioning), ii) functional paradigm
theory (similarity-attraction, pleasure seeking), iii) cognitive
consistency theory (new information creates tension that needs to
be relieved by adopting schemata), iv) congruity principle theory
(interpretations of new information tend to be congruent with
existing schemata), v) cognitive dissonance theory (certain
actions and information produce tension that needs to be relieved
by adopting mental structures or behavior), counter-attitudinal
advocacy (belief-discrepant messages are persuasive), vi)
inoculation theory (combining supportive and refutational
information to achieve better persuasion) and vii) attribution
theory (people make simple models to predict events of the world
and behaviors of other people). [for a review, see 50].Some
contemporary models of persuasion are i) social learning theory
(environmental learning is the source of persuasion, such as social
relationships), ii) the elaboration likelihood model (a specific and
limited model on how a piece of information may influence the
attitudes of the receiver) and iii) the communication/persuasion
model (the source, the message content and form, the channel, the
properties of the receiver and the immediacy of the
communication influence persuasion). [2, 39, 42]
The latter approach partly resembles the approach of Mind-Based
Technologies as a way of finding out the values of relevant
parameters in the layers of technology, the user and the transient
results of processing, such as emotion and cognition. Other
frameworks have also been presented. Meyers-Levy and
Malaviya (1998) have presented a framework introducing several
248248
strategies to process persuasive messages. Each strategy
represents a different amount of cognitive resources employed
during processing and may influence the level of persuasion. [38]
The position of the authors is that while various theories and
models for persuasion have been presented, within the context of
personalized information presentation especially by varying both
the substance of the message and the form of the message it is
difficult to know what types of persuasive effects may emerge.
This is partly due to the fact that especially the perception of form
of information is most likely not a conscious process involving in-
depth processing and cognitive appraisal but a rather automatic
and non-cognitive process. Hence, if one influences the
conditions of perceptual processing or some early-level cognitive
processing of multimodal information, no clear models are
available for explaining and predicting persuasion. Also, the exact
influence of the amount of cognitive resources employed during
early and later processing of a persuasive message remains
unknown. It is most evident that case studies with particular
application are needed to verify such effects.
However, the authors present one possible way of seeing
persuasion mostly via a link to transient emotional states and
moods immediately before, during and after processing
information presented through a Psychological Customization
system. Yet, based on this approach the claim for more efficient
persuasion in each application area, such as using Psychological
Customization in advertising or e-commerce product information
remains a complex task. Despite this difficulty, we now present a
possible selection of relevant psychological principles related to
perceptual processing and persuasion of advertising and e-
commerce product information.
First, a similarity-attraction process may arise between the
presented information and the personality of the user that may
lead to the information being processed more fully [i.e., trait-
congruency hypothesis; see 54]. That is, users are likely to be
attracted to information with content and formal characteristics
manifesting a personality similar to their own [see e.g., 21].
Second, the decrease of cognitive load in perceptual processing
(i.e., high processing fluency) may induce a feeling of
pleasantness that may label the information processed [for a
review, see 65]. That is, fluent stimuli are associated with
increased liking and positive affective responses as assessed by
facial EMG, for example. Third, the creation of specific
emotional reactions and moods varying in valence and arousal
may label the information processed; here the effects may depend
on the type of emotion. For instance, mood-congruency may
provide more intensive engagement with the information
presented when the mood induced by the information processed
matches a pre-existing mood of the user [see 49]. Fourth, the
emotional reactions may induce increased attention that may lead
to more in-depth processing of information [e.g., 26]. Fifth, as
suggested by excitation transfer theory, arousal induced by a
processed stimuli influences the processing of subsequent stimuli
[see 71, 72].
Sixth, according to selective-exposure theory, individuals are
motivated to make media choices in order to regulate their
affective state [i.e., to maintain excitatory homeostasis; 73]. This
may mean that people use also e-commerce product information
to manage their moods, i.e. neutralize an unwanted mood, such as
depression by engaging with exciting and positive product
information. Users may also intensify an existing mood by
selecting product information content that may add to the present
mood. Seventh, affective priming research indicates that the
valence of subliminally exposed primes (e.g., facial expressions)
influences the affective ratings of subsequent targets [40, 43],
including video messages presented on a small screen [48].
Eighth, the perceived personal relevance of the particular
information to the user exerts a robust influence on message
processing and involvement [64]. This means that if the user is
interested in the product described in the information presented,
he will be quite involved when processing the information and
hence his memory of the product will be enhanced. Consequently,
it has been shown that information tailored to the needs and
contexts of users often increases the potential for attitude and
behavior change [5, 11, 41, 66, 67]. Further, there is quite a lot of
research indicating that, when compared to video form, text has a
greater capacity to trigger active or systematic message
processing and is perceived as more involving [see 44]; this
depends on the mood of the user, however [48]. Ninth, some
emotional states and moods lead to secondary effects related to
decision-making, judgment and behavior [4, 10, 20].
It then seems that indeed a relevant area to focus on regarding
persuasion with Psychological Customization is emotion (arousal
and valence) immediately before, during and right after viewing
product information and ads.
One may focus on "primitive" emotional responses or emotions
requiring more extensive cognitive appraisal and processing. Both
of these types of emotions can be linked to various psychological
consequences. Consequently, with emotionally loaded
personalized information products one may focus on i) creating
immediate and primitive emotional responses, ii) creating mood
and iii) indirectly influencing secondary effects of emotion and
mood, such as attention, memory, performance and judgment.
Known psychological mechanisms used to create desired
emotions or moods would be for instance similarity attraction
(trait congruency), decrease of cognitive load (high processing
fluency), mood congruency, excitation transfer, mood
management and affective priming.
These mechanisms are not without problems as they may have
also opposite effects. For instance mood congruency may
decrease attention and hence lessen the mobilization of cognitive
resources in processing a persuasive message. Also, even though
emotion is good candidate to look for a strong link to persuasion,
the exact nature of this link is unclear.
The key idea of using emotion as a hypothesized gateway to
persuasion would be that more in-depth processing of information
caused by arousal, valence, attention or involvement may lead to
increased memory and perceived trustworthiness of information
and also influence attitudes towards the product in question [e.g.
65]. This in turn may lead to instant behavior, such as buying
online, clicking through an ad or purchasing the item later in a
department store based on long-term memory schemata. It should
be noted that this view is based on empiric evidence of the
psychological effects and their consequences in general, but they
have not yet been validated with the use of e-commerce systems
that personalize the form of information for persuasion.
Hence, it would be most beneficial to capture the users´ emotional
states or mood before the user starts to browse a particular piece
of product information to be able to automatically realize various
effects with adaptation of the form of information and track the
changes of the online behavior of the user.
249249
3.2 Persuasive Advertising
The effectiveness of persuasion in advertisements in general is a
complex issue. Subliminal priming, use of commonly known
symbols, matching the advertisement to basic biological needs,
such as food, shelter and sex, maximizing the credibility of the
message, telling a compelling story, creating a desirable image of
the perceiver with the product, placing TV-ads immediately after
emotional (arousal) and attentional peaks of TV-programming
and other approaches have been widely used. However, research
into effectiveness of the form of presentation of advertising is not
widely available in the scientific community. Moreover, little
research has been done to understand the psychological
effectiveness of online advertising. It should be also noted that
advertising may be mostly a creative and design-driven high-
speed field of industrial production in which various types of
authors and artists collaborate like in film-production to make the
advertisement rather than a field filled with scientists attempting
to analyze the advertisements and their effects in great detail.
In internet-based advertising the advertisement is typically
presented on a web page as a banner. The banner is embedded in
editorial content, such as the front page of a magazine or online
newspaper. The banners are often placed according to the number
and demography of the visitors on a particular section of editorial
content. This means a best guess is taken as to what may be the
most efficient and visible way of placing the banner based on
previous knowledge of the behavior of desired user segments on
the website.
It seems that ads placed in context work best also online. This
means that an ad that is related to the editorial content it is
displayed with is more efficiently persuasive [3]. Another issue is
that text-based ads online may work better than only graphics.
This implies that most ads contain text based over a graphical
surface. Overall, very simple principles (larger is better etc.) seem
to guide people’s choices: e.g., larger ads are thought to be more
appealing and affective.
Further, in mobile contexts personalized advertising has been
studied from the point of view of targeting users by emotions in
addition to location and other relevant factors [19].
However, the exact transient psychological influence of a
particular piece of editorial content the online advertisement is
displayed with remains unknown. It is possible that the editorial
content repels the user and the advertisement is also labeled by
this emotion. It is also possible that the editorial content induces a
positive emotion and the advertisement gets an advantage based
on this emotional state. The emotional tone of the advertisements
and editorial content may also interact. For example, Kamins,
Marks, and Skinner (1991) showed that commercials that are
more consistent in emotional tone with the TV program perform
better as measured by likeability and purchase intention ratings
than those that are inconsistent in tone. Sometimes advertisements
are changed in real-time per type of user as the system recognizes
a user segment to which a certain banner has been targeted.
However, what is lacking here is i) more detailed information of
the type of user (such as what may be the most efficient way to
influence him psychologically) and ii) what may be the
psychological impact on the same user of the editorial content
within which the banner is placed. [22]
With a Psychological Customization system some of these gaps
may be at least indirectly addressed as presented in Table 2.
Table 2. Technological possibilities of persuasive advertising
with Psychological Customization.
Layer of
Technology
Adaptations of Advertising Banners
1. Physical
-multimedia
PC or mobile
device
-The advertisement substance and form may be
matched to the technology used by lifestyle segments
or other means of segmentation (hip ads for mobile
phones etc.)
-Mobile device: user changeable covers in colors and
shapes that facilitate emotion
2. Code
-Windows-
type user
interface
-Mouse, pen,
speech,
-The user interface elements (background color,
forms, shapes, directions of navigation buttons etc.)
may be varied in real-time per page per user in which
a certain advertisement is located to create various
emotions and ease of perceptual processing
-audio channel may be used to create emotional
effects (using audio input/output sound, varying
pitch, tone, background music, audio effects etc.).
3. Content
A. Substance
- Fixed
multimedia
content
-The editorial content may be matched with the ad
-The content of the ad may be matched to the users
based on various factors (interests, use history,
demography, personality etc.)
-Adding subliminal extra content to create emotion
B. Form
Modality
-Multimedia
-Modality may be matched to cognitive style or pre-
existing mood of the enable easier processing.
-Background music, audio effects or ringing tones
may be used as a separate modality to facilitate
desired emotions and moods.
-Animated text can be used to create more efficient
processing of text facilitate some emotional effects.
Visual
presentation
-Emotionally evaluated and positioned layout designs
and templates for ads (colors, shapes and textures)
may be utilized per type of user segment
Structure
-temporal,
other
-Offering emotionally evaluated and positioned
narrative templates for creating emotionally engaging
stories.
Based on Table 2 a Psychological Customization system may
operate by trying to optimize desired emotional effects that may
be related to persuasion. The content provider, such as a media
company, is able to set desired effects per type of user group and
advertiser need by using a Psychological Customization system.
Also, the placement of ads within desired editorial contexts may
be utilized with a more developed system. When a user logs in
with his profile already to the database of the content provider the
system will start real-time personalization of form of information.
As the user has logged in, the front page of the service may be
altered for him according to advertiser needs. As the user
navigates the system and consumes information the system
follows ready-set effects to be realized to the user. It is clear that
such a scenario is difficult, but if it is done in a simple enough
manner it may be that the persuasive efficiency of online
advertising may increase.
3.3 Persuasive e-Commerce Product
Information
Personalized e-commerce has not been studied widely. It has been
found that while personalization of the content substance
displayed to each user may provide value, the users have a strong
motivation to understand why the system is displaying a
particular piece of information for them. Also, users´ wish to be in
control of their user profiles. [see 1, 23]
Hence, it seems that users are at least partly suspicious to the
system adapting the substance of information to them. However,
250250
in many cases it may be possible to adapt the form of information
in personalized applications in conjunction to content substance
variation or even without it. The adaptation of form of
information to the user may even be a more transparent way of
personalizing user-system- interaction as the user most likely does
not question the form of a particular substance. Hence, there are
emerging possibilities for personalization and customization in
this area.
There are at least two different types of advanced e-commerce
systems commonly used: i) systems using recommendation
engines and other personalization features to present information
in a media-like manner and ii) systems using persuasive interface
agents, creating a relationship between the user and the agent. The
focus here is mostly on presentation of product information, such
as information (product properties, comparisons, pricing,
functionalities and other information) of a new car, digital
camera, computer or garment. Although, in the context of product
presentation, users have usually been suggested to prefer a
combination site including pictures and text [e.g. 35], individual
differences in their preferences are likely to occur.
The technological possibilities for persuasive presentation of
product information are much like those presented for persuasive
advertising seen in Table 2. In other words, different layers of
technology may be adapted to the user of an e-commerce system
to create various psychological effects when presenting product
information.
With personalized e-commerce systems for product information
presentation one may facilitate positive emotional responses for
instance by selecting the modalities of the information to be
displayed according to the processing styles and alter visual
layouts of the interface according to the personalities of the users.
The ease of processing information and the similarity-attraction
between visual layouts and personalities may create positive
emotional states. As for brand awareness one may indirectly
influence memory with the facilitation of positive emotion and
increase memory-based performance on the task such as brand
recognition and recall. By increasing attention one may increase
the likelihood of the user of an e-commerce system to learn
product information more efficiently. Positive emotion and mood
also has the effect of making the user adapt a less risk-prone
approach to making decisions [20]. This may be used to present
product information in a familiar manner creating a safe
atmosphere around the product to make it more desirable when
the user is making purchasing decisions in a positive mood.
Psychological Customization may be used for persuasion also
with recommendation systems. The system knows the users´
profile, such as type of personality, and the desired psychological
effect is set to positive emotion in as many page-views of the
recommendations as possible. The user starts using the system
and finds an interesting product that the system recommends to
her. The form of the recommendation information is tailored to
the users´ profile and desired psychological effect in real-time
when the page uploads to make the realization of positive emotion
as probable as possible. The system may select the modality of
recommendation from text to audio, or from audio to animation;
the system may change the background colors of the page and
modify the shape and color of the navigation buttons, for instance.
In this case, the system will try to do everything possible to
facilitate positive emotion but change the substance of the
recommendation itself. Naturally in some cases depending on
type of user and the type of recommendation, the available
databases of recommendation information and the available
means of Psychological Customization of form of
recommendation information, the effect to be achieved is more or
less likely to occur. However, even effects that provide some
percentages or even tens of percents of more targeted positive
emotion may make a difference in persuasion and hence attitudes
towards the product and buying behavior. This is especially true if
the recommendation system website has masses of users and
hence even a slight increase in sales effectiveness may add up to
significant amounts of revenue.
Further, one may discuss interface agents for product information
presentation. Often with interface agents an illusion of being in
interaction with another human being is created in the user via
using for example animated agents that seemingly exhibit various
human properties, such as gender, personality, politeness, group
membership and other factors. Here one possible application
would be to add an agent to float atop of a page with product
information to comment or recommend it, to aid the user in
navigation and finding interesting information and to act as a
feedback channel for the user, such as collecting the users´
interest profile or other situational relevant information.
It is known that both the substance of the interaction (what is
being sold, or what information is presented, and what the agent
says, or how it acts) and the form of interaction (how information
is presented, what is the appearance and personality or other
factors of the agent) influence for instance trust, persuasiveness,
emotion and liking of the transaction [e.g. 51].
What Psychological Customization may add here may be more
systematic and efficient personalization of the way of presenting
information together with customizing the selected appearance
and other features of the agent in without actually changing the
substance of the interaction, i.e. what the agent says or what
product information is presented, for instance.
4. CONCLUSION
The authors believe that no other comprehensive framework of
varying form of information to systematically create emotional
and cognitive effects has been presented, specifically in
persuasive presentation of online advertising and product
information in e-commerce sites. Differences to other approaches
to influencing user experience in general are various. Usability
studies traditionally address the question of how to make difficult
technology easy to use. Usability is at least partly founded on the
idea of optimal human-machine performance, i.e. how well a user
can manipulate and control a machine. However, there is a
growing conviction that, in order to ensure high user satisfaction
usability is not sufficient [see 12, 24].
The approach to system design presented in this paper may be
beneficial to the fields of e-commerce and online advertising
because: i) it provides a possibility to personalize the form of
information that may be more transparent and acceptable to the
users than adapting the substance of information, ii) it offers a
way of more systematically accessing and controlling transient
psychological effects of users of e-commerce and advertisement
displaying systems, iii) it offers possibilities to more efficiently
persuade and consequently influence behavior of individual users
and iv) it is compatible with existing and new systems
(recommendation engines, click-through-systems, other) as an
add-on or a middleware layer in software with many potential
application areas.
251251
The potential drawbacks of the framework include the following:
i) it may be costly to build the design-rule databases and actually
working real-life systems for creating systematic psychological
effects, ii) the rule-databases may have to be adapted also locally
and culturally, iii) the method needed to create a rule-database is
not easy to use and may be suspect to ecological validity (eye-
tracking, behavioral and psychophysiological measures, self-
report, field tests are needed to verify laboratory results etc.) and
iv) if the system works efficiently it may raise privacy issues,
such as the intimacy of a personal psychological user profile
(personality, cognitive style, values, other). Also ethical issues
related to mind-control or even propaganda may arise.
It should be noted that to build a smoothly functioning
Psychological Customization system one should do much more
research and gain more evidence of the systematic relationships of
user profiles, information forms and psychological effects.
However, in our research for the past four years we have found
many feasible rules for personalization for psychological effects.
Regarding future research, content management technologies
should be elaborated to provide for the platform that prototypes
can be built on. Consequently, we aim to build, evaluate and
field-test prototypes of Psychological Customization in various
areas, specifically in mobile, urban ad-hoc contexts and situations
related to mobile advertising and e-commerce, but also other
areas such as mobile gaming communities, mobile content,
mobile messaging, knowledge work systems and city navigation.
5. REFERENCES
[1] Alpert, S. R.; Karat, J.; Karat, C-M; Brodie, C and Vergo,
J.G. (2003) User Attitudes Regarding a User-Adaptive
eCommerce Web Site. User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction 13 (4): 373-396, November 2003.
[2] Bandura (1977) Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
[3] Baudisch, P. and Leopold, D. (2000) Attention, indifference,
dislike, action: Web advertising involving users. Netnomics
Volume 2 , Issue 1 2000, pp. 75-83.
[4] Brave S. and Nass, C. (2003). Emotion in human-computer
interaction. In Jacko, J.A. and Sears, A. (Ed.), The Human-
Computer Interaction Handbook. Fundamentals, Evolving
Technologies and Emerging Applications. (pp. 81-96).
London : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
[5] Beniger, J. R. (1987) Personalization of mass media and the
growth of pseudo-community. Communication Research,
14(3), pp 352-371.
[6] Benkler, Y. (2000) From Consumers to Users: Shifting the
Deeper Structures of Regulation. Federal Communications
Law Journal 52, 561-63.
[7] Billmann, D. (1998) Representations. In Bechtel, W. and
Graham, G. (1998) A companion to cognitive science, 649-
659. Blackwell publishers, Malden, MA.
[8] Biocca, F. and Levy, M. (1995) Communication in the age of
virtual reality. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
[9] Cuperfain, R. and Clarke, T. K. (1985) A new perspective on
subliminal perception. Journal of Advertising, 14, 36-41.
[10] Clore, G. C. and Gasper, K. (2000). Feeling is believing.
Some affective influences on belief. In Frijda, N.H.,
Manstead, A. S. R. and Bem, S. (Ed.), Emotions and beliefs:
How feelings influence thoughts (pp. 10-44).
Paris/Cambridge: Editions de la Maison des Sciences de
l´Homme and Cambridge University Press.
[11] Dijkstra, J. J., Liebrand, W.B.G and Timminga, E. (1998)
Persuasiveness of expert systems. Behavior and Information
Technology, 17(3), pp 155-163.
[12] Dillon, A. (2001). Beyond usability: process, outcome and
affect in human computer interactions. Online:
http://www.ischool.utexas.edu/~adillon/publications/beyond
_usability.html.
[13] Egan, D. E. (1988). Individual differences in human-
computer interaction. In: M. Helander (Ed.), Handbook of
Human-Computer Interaction, p. 543 – 568. Elsevier, New
York.
[14] Eysenck, M. (1994) Individual Differences: Normal and
Abnormal. New Jersey: Erlbaum.
[15] Fogg, B.J. (2003) Motivating, influencing and persuading
users. In Jacko, J.A. and Sears, A. (Ed.), The Human-
Computer Interaction Handbook. Fundamentals, Evolving
Technologies and Emerging Applications. (pp. 81-96).
London : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
[16] Fogg, B. J. (2002) Persuasive technology. Using computers
to change what we think and do. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers, New York.
[17] Ford, M. E. (1992) Motivating humans: goals, emotions,
personal agency beliefs. Newbury Park, Ca: Sage.
[18] Hampson, S. E. & Colman, A. M. (Eds., 1995) Individual
differences and personality. London: Longman.
[19] Hristova, N. and O'Hare, G. M. P. (2004) Ad-me: Wireless
Advertising Adapted to the User Location, Device and
Emotions. Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 37th
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (HICSS'04) - Track 9 - Volume 9
[20] Isen, A. M. (2000). Positive affect and decision making. In
Lewis, M. and Haviland-Jones, J. M. (Ed.), Handbook of
emotions (2nd ed.) (pp. 417-435). New York: Guilford Press.
[21] Kallinen, K., & Ravaja, N. (in press). Emotion-related
effects of speech rate and rising vs. falling background music
melody during audio news: The moderating influence of
personality. Personality and Individual Differences.
[22] Kamins, M.A., Marks, L.J., & Skinner, D. (1991). Television
commercial evaluation in the context of program induced
mood: Congruency versus consistency effects. Journal of
Advertising, 20, 1-14.
[23] Karat, M-C., Blom, J. and Karat, J. (in press) Designing
Personalized User Experiences in eCommerce. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
[24] Karat, J. (2003) Beyond task completion: Evaluation of
affective components of use. In Jacko, J.A. and Sears, A.
(Ed.), The Human-Computer Interaction Handbook.
Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies and Emerging
Applications. (pp. 81-96). London : Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
[25] Kihlström, J. F., Barnhardt, T. M. and Tataryn, D. J. (1992)
Implicit perception. In Bornstein, R. F. and Pittmann, T. S.
252252
(eds.) Perception without awareness. Cognitive, clinical and
social perspectives, 17-54. Guilford, New York.
[26] Krohne, H.W., Pieper, M., Knoll, N., & Breimer, N. (2002).
The cognitive regulation of emotions: The role of success
versus failure experience and coping dispositions. Cognition
and Emotion, 16, 217-243.
[27] Krosnick, J. A., Betz, A. L., Jussim, J. L. and Lynn, A. R.
(1992) Subliminal conditioning of attitudes. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 18, 152-162.
[28] Laarni, J. (2003). Effects of color, font type and font style on
user preferences. In C. Stephanidis (Ed.) Adjunct
Proceedings of HCI International 2003. (Pp. 31-32). Crete
University Press, Heraklion.
[29] Laarni, J. (2002). Searching for optimal methods of
presenting dynamic text on different types of screens. In:
O.W. Bertelsen, S. Bödker & K. Kuutti (Eds.), Tradition and
Transcendence. Proceedings of The Second Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, October 19-23,
2002, Arhus, Denmark (Pp. 217 – 220).
[30] Laarni, J. & Kojo, I.(2001). Reading financial news from
PDA and laptop displays. In: M. J. Smith & G. Salvendy
(Eds.) Systems, Social and Internationalization Design
Aspects of Human-Computer Interaction. Vol. 2 of
Proceedings of HCI International 2001. Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ. (Pp. 109 – 113.)
[31] Laarni, J., Kojo, I. & Kärkkäinen, L. (2002). Reading and
searching information on small display screens. In: D. de
Waard, K. Brookhuis, J. Moraal, & A. Toffetti (Eds.),
Human Factors in Transportation, Communication, Health,
and the Workplace. (Pp. 505 – 516). Shake, Maastricht. (On
the occasion of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
Europe Chapter Annual Meeting in Turin, Italy, November
2001).
[32] Lang, A. (1990) Involuntary attention and physiological
arousal evoked by structural features and mild emotion in
TV commercials. Communication Research, 17 (3), 275-299.
[33] Lang, A., Dhillon, P. and Dong, Q. (1995) Arousal, emotion
and memory for television messages. Journal of
Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 38, 1-15.
[34] Lang, A., Newhagen, J. and Reeves. B. (1996) Negative
video as structure: Emotion, attention, capacity and memory.
Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 40, 460-477.
[35] Lightner, N.J., & Eastman, C. (2002). User preference for
product information in remote purchase environments.
Journal of Electronic Commerce Research [Online], 3,
Available from http://www.csulb.edu/web/journals/
jecr/issues/20023/paper6.pdf.
[36] Lombard, M. and Ditton, T. (2000) Measuring presence: A
literature-based approach to the development of a
standardized paper-and-pencil instrument. Project abstract
submitted to Presence 2000: The third international
workshop on presence.
[37] Lombard, M., Reich, R., Grabe, M. E., Bracken, C. and
Ditton, T. (2000) Presence and television: The role of screen
size. Human Communication Research, 26(1), 75-98.
[38] Meyers-Levy, J. & Malaviya, P. (1998). Consumers’
processing of persuasive advertisements. An integrative
framework of persuasion theories. Journal of Marketing 63,
45–60.
[39] McGuire, W. J. (1989) Theoretical foundations of
campaigns. In R.E. Rice and C.K. Atkin (eds.) Public
communication campaigns (2nd
ed, pp 43-65). Newbury
Park, Ca: Sage.
[40] Monahan, J.L. (1998). I don't know it but I like you: The
influence of nonconscious affect on person perception.
Human Communication Research, 24, 480-500.
[41] Nowak, G. J., Shamp, S., Hollander, B., Cameron, G. T.,
Schumann, D. W. and Thorson, E. (1999) Interactive media:
A means for more meaningful advertising? Advertising and
consumer psychology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
[42] Petty, R.E., & Cacioppo, J.T. (1986). Communication and
persuasion: Central and peripheral routes to attitude change.
New York: Springer-Verlag.
[43] Murphy, S.T., Monahan, J.L., & Zajonc, R.B. (1995).
Additivity of nonconscious affect: Combined effects of
priming and exposure. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69, 589-602.
[44] Pfau, M., Holbert, R.L., Zubric, S.J., Pasha, N.H., & Lin,
W.-K. (2000). Role and influence of communication
modality in the process of resistance to persuasion. Media
Psychology, 2, 1-33.
[45] Ravaja, N. (2004). Effects of a small talking facial image on
autonomic activity: The moderating influence of
dispositional BIS and BAS sensitivities and emotions.
Biological Psychology, 65, 163-183.
[46] Ravaja, N. (in press). Contributions of psychophysiology to
media research: Review and recommendations. Media
Psychology.
[47] Ravaja, N., & Kallinen, K. (in press). Emotional effects of
startling background music during reading news reports: The
moderating influence of dispositional BIS and BAS
sensitivities. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology.
[48] Ravaja, N., Kallinen, K., Saari, T., & Keltikangas-Järvinen,
L. (in press). Suboptimal exposure to facial expressions
when viewing video messages from a small screen: Effects
on emotion, attention, and memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied.
[49] Ravaja, N., Saari, T., Kallinen, K., & Laarni, J. (2004). The
Role of Mood in the Processing of Media Messages from a
Small Screen: Effects on Subjective and Physiological
Responses. Manuscript submitted for publication.
[50] Reardon, K. R. (1991) Persuasion in practice. Newbury Park,
Ca: Sage.
[51] Reeves, B. and Nass, C. (1996) The media equation. How
people treat computers, television and new media like real
people and places. Cambridge University Press, CSLI,
Stanford.
[52] Riding, R. J. and Rayner, S. (1998) Cognitive styles and
learning strategies. Understanding style differences in
learning and behavior. David Fulton Publishers, London.
253253
[53] Riecken, D. (2000) Personalized views on personalization.
Communications of the ACM, V. 43, 8, 27-28.
[54] Rusting, C.L. (1998). Personality, mood, and cognitive
processing of emotional information: Three conceptual
frameworks. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 165-196.
[55] Saari, T. (1998) Knowledge creation and the production of
individual autonomy. How news influences subjective
reality. Reports from the department of teacher education in
Tampere university. A15/1998.
[56] Saari, T. (2001) Mind-Based Media and Communications
Technologies. How the Form of Information Influences Felt
Meaning. Acta Universitatis Tamperensis 834. Tampere
University Press, Tampere 2001.
[57] Saari, T. (2002) Designing Mind-Based Media and
Communications Technologies. Proceedings of Presence
2002 Conference, Porto, Portugal.
[58] Saari, T. (2003a) Designing for Psychological Effects.
Towards Mind-Based Media and Communications
Technologies. In Harris, D., Duffy, V., Smith, M. and
Stephanidis, C. (eds.) Human-Centred Computing:
Cognitive, Social and Ergonomic Aspects. Volume 3 of the
Proceedings of HCI International 2003, pp. 557-561.
[59] Saari, T. (2003b) Mind-Based Media and Communications
Technologies. A Framework for producing personalized
psychological effects. Proceedings of Human Factors and
Ergonomics 2003 -conference. 13.-17.10.2003 Denver,
Colorado.
[60] Saari, T. (in press, a) Using Mind-Based Technologies to
facilitate Positive Emotion and Mood with Media Content.
Accepted to proceedings of to Positive Emotion, 2nd
European Conference. Italy, July 2004.
[61] Saari, T. (in press, b) Facilitating Learning from Online
News with Mind-Based Technologies. Accepted to
proceedings of EDMedia 2004, Lugano, Switzerland.
[62] Saari, T. and Turpeinen, M. (in press, a) Towards
Psychological Customization of Information for Individuals
and Social Groups. In Karat, J., Blom, J. and Karat. M.-C.
(eds.) Personalization of User Experiences for eCommerce,
Kluwer.
[63] Saari, T. and Turpeinen, M. (in press, b) Psychological
customization of information. Applications for personalizing
the form of news. Accepted to proceedings of ICA 2004, 27.-
31.5. 2004, New Orleans, USA.
[64] Schneider, S.L., & Laurion, S.K. (1993). Do we know what
we've learned from listening to the news? Memory and
Cognition, 21, 198-209.
[65] Schwarz, N. (in press). Meta-cognitive experiences in
consumer judgment and decision making. Journal of
Consumer Psychology.
[66] Stretcher, V. J., Kreutzer, M., Den Boer, D.-J., Kobrin, S.,
Hospers, H. J., and Skinner, C. S. (1994) the effects of
computer-tailored smoking cessation messages in family
practice settings. Journal of Family Practice, 39(3), 262-270.
[67] Stretcher, V. J. (1999) Computer tailored smoking cessation
materials: A review and discussion. Special issue: Computer
tailored education. Patient Education & Counceling, 36(2),
107-117.
[68] Turpeinen, M. (2000) Customizing news content for
individuals and communities. Acta Polytechnica
Scandinavica. Mathematics and computing series no. 103.
Helsinki University of Technology, Espoo.
[69] Turpeinen, M. and Saari, T. (2004) System Architechture for
Psychological Customization of Information. Proceedings of
HICSS-37- conference, 5.-8.1. 2004, Hawaii.
[70] Vecchi, T., Phillips, L. H. & Cornoldi, C. (2001). Individual
differences in visuo-spatial working memory. In: M. Denis,
R. H. Logie, C. Cornoldi, M. de Vega, & J. Engelkamp
(Eds.), Imagery, language, and visuo-spatial thinking.
Psychology Press, Hove.
[71] Zillmann, D. (1971). Excitation transfer in communication-
mediated aggressive behavior. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 7, 419-434.
[72] Zillmann, D. (1978). Attribution and misattribution of
excitatory reactions. In J.H. Harvey, W.J. Ickes, & R.F. Kidd
(Eds.), New directions in attribution research (Vol. 2, pp.
335-368). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
[73] Zillmann, D., & Bryant, J. (1985). Affect, mood, and
emotion as determinants of selective exposure. In D.
Zillmann & J. Bryant (Eds.), Selective exposure to
communication (pp. 157-190). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
254254
