Analysis of Soft Handover Measurements
in 3G Network
Kimmo Raivio
Adaptive Informatics Research Centre
Helsinki University of Technology
P.O. Box 5400, FIN-02015 HUT, Finland
kimmo.raivio@hut.fi
ABSTRACT
A neural network based clustering method for the analysis 
of soft handovers in 3G network is introduced. The method 
is highly visual and it could be utilized in explorative anal-
ysis of mobile networks. In this paper, the method is used 
to find groups of similar mobile cell pairs in the sense of 
handover measurements. The groups or clusters found by 
the method are characterized by the rate of successful han-
dovers as well as the causes of failing handover attempts. 
The most interesting clusters are those which represent cer-
tain type of problems in handover attempts. By comparing 
variable histograms of a selected cluster to histograms of 
the whole data set an application domain expert may find 
some explanations on problems. Two clusters are investi-
gated further and causes of failing handover attempts are 
discussed.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.4.3 [Information Systems Applications]: Communi-
cations Applications—Information browsers; I.5.3 [Pattern 
Recognition]: Clustering
General Terms
Algorithms, Management, Performance
Keywords
3G network, soft handover, mobility management, data min-
ing, hierarchical clustering, neural networks
1. INTRODUCTION
Mobility management is a great challenge in current and 
future radio access networks. In third generation (3G) net-
works user experienced quality of service (QoS) under a 
move of mobile station (MS) from one mobile cell to an-
other cell has been improved by implementing soft handover
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee.
MSWIM’06, October 2–6, 2006, Torremolinos, Malaga, Spain.
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-477-4/06/0010 ...$5.00.
(SHO). Soft handover makes it possible to have connections 
on several base stations (BS) simultaneously.
In this paper, a set of measurements which can be used for 
soft handover decision making are analyzed and compared 
with other measurements in which statistics of successful-
ness of handover attempts have been collected. We do not 
know exactly the parameters of used SHO algorithm. SHOs 
are investigated only on basis of data set and some general 
knowledge of 3G systems. Mobile cell pairs with handovers 
(HO) are divided in groups using clustering algorithm. Cell 
pairs in which SHOs are similar with each other fall in same 
group. Different types of SHO failures are analyzed using 
clustering information and distributions of measurements in 
each cluster.
In Section 2 the soft handover concept, the measurements 
and used neural network algorithm are shortly introduced. 
Analysis methods which have been used are described in 
Section 3. Preliminary results are shown and discussed in 
Section 4. Finally, some conclusions are drawn in the last 
section.
2. BACKGROUND
In this section, the basics of soft handover in 3G network 
is explained and the available data set is introduced. Neural 
network algorithm used in data clustering is also presented.
2.1 Soft handover
Soft handover is a state of MS being connected to several 
BSs simultaneously. In GSM networks, a fixed threshold for 
handover from one cell to another is used. In 3G networks, 
each MS is connected to a network via a set of BSs called 
active set. Members of active set are updated on basis of 
measurements made by MS. The advantage of having con-
nections on several BS simultaneously is realized when MS 
is moving towards another BS, the MS should have a con-
nection at least on one BS all the time. In GSM system, the 
older connection has to be terminated before the new one 
can be setup. The connection setup phases are the most 
vulnerable steps in a call. The connection between MS and 
BS is setup in a beginning of a call or later when handover 
occurs. If the setup is not successful, it is useful to have an 
existing connection to another BS or otherwise the call will 
be abnormally terminated.
Handover can occur due to signal quality reasons or when 
the traffic capacity in a cell has reached its maximum or is 
approaching it. In the latter case, traffic load in the network 
can be distributed more uniformly by handing over some 
users from the most crowded cells. The above method is
330
called cell breathing. Use of cell breathing without giving 
the information to the analyzer increases the complexity of 
the analysis and can mix up a lot in the analysis process.
For a user soft handover means power saving (in uplink) 
and less abnormally terminated calls. For an operator lower 
MS transmitting powers mean less interference. When MS 
is in SHO, several BSs listen the same uplink channel, but 
all BSs have their own downlink channel. The offered diver-
sity is resource consuming in downlink direction. There is 
a tradeoff between better QoS in mobility management and 
consumption of resources.
Decision of soft handover is made in mobile station by 
comparing the signal-to-noise ratios of active and candidate 
BSs Common Pilot Channel (CPICH) [2]. Members of ac-
tive set are selected on basis of powers of this pilot signal [5, 
12, 16] .
BSs which are not in the active set but next from it in the 
sense of measured quantity are in candidate set. Candidate 
set BSs are constantly monitored whether their offer better 
connection than cells in active set. Cells not in active or 
candidate set are monitored less frequently whether their 
can enter the candidate set. Cell is either added to the 
active set if the maximum amount of cells in the active set 
is not reached or cell replaces the cell which offers the lowest 
quality connection. Cells which are no more able to offer 
a connection which is good enough are removed from the 
active set.
Thresholds are used in adding, replacing and removing 
BSs from active set by BSs in candidate set to avoid ping 
pong effect. This means that a value of measured quantity 
should be with a certain threshold better than the old one 
for changing cells in active set. If measurement which is only 
slightly better (i.e. with zero threshold) is enough for chang-
ing cells in sets, it is quite possible that the same change is 
performed in opposite direction very soon. Thus, the origi-
nal update of the set was useless and resource consuming in 
the sense of all required signaling.
2.2 Data
Three data sets of Key Performance Indicator (KPI) level 
measurements related on handover events are saved. Each 
set consists of measurements collected during one hour. KPI 
is considered as an important measure to be followed. It can 
be a measurement by itself or it has been computed from a 
group of raw counters [10]. One data vector consists of prob-
abilities, means, sums and counters computed over one hour 
of one source target cell pair. Here, source refers on cell 
in active set and target on another cell which is measured 
and possibly added in active or candidate set. Measure-
ments of target cell are compared with those of source cell. 
Handover decisions are made in MS on basis of measured 
and computed base stations received signal signal-to-noise 
ratios (Ec/N0). For each source and target cell pair mean 
of signal-to-noise ratio differences is computed using
EcnoDiffMean = mean {[Ec/N0]target — [Ec/N0] source}
Mean value and number off made comparisons (EcnoDiffNum) 
are saved. Four bin pdfs of these measurements are also 
stored with bin centers in -6, -3, 0 and 3dB, correspond-
ingly.
In addition to Ec/N0 measurements, averages of received 
pilot signal power ratios between BS pairs (av rscp ratio) 
have been computed and stored in database. The time and 
probability of being in SHO with each other have also been 
measured. Time of target and source cell being in SHO with 
each other simultaneously is counted in variable t act. Then, 
at least one MS is in SHO having both source and target cell 
in its active set. The measurement is symmetric for a switch 
of source and target cells. Time of target cell being in SHO 
with source cell is stored in t act dir. Cell total time in 
SHO is saved in tot time sho. It has been counted over all 
the targets of fixed source cell. Probability of target and 
source being in same active set is stored in variable p act.
Total number of SHO attempts to add target to active 
set is stored in SHO total att. Ratio of successful SHO at-
tempts which lead to addition of target cell in active set is 
saved in add ratio. In addition to those above, the num-
ber of SHO failures is stored in pfail total and ratios of four 
different failure causes are saved. Failure occurs in setup 
or active time phase of SHO and it is either radio channel 
problem or not. Probability of cell being in monitored state 
is also measured (p4th 5th). All the measurements used in 
the analysis are shortly described in Table 1.
A lot of data has been saved in data sets, but also some 
very important information is missing. Due to missing in-
formation on cell capacities, their locations and performed 
manual and automatic tuning operations on network config-
uration between successive data set saves, only preliminary 
analysis can be performed. The rest of the analysis process 
is described on theoretical level.
2.3 Self-Organizing Map
Self-Organizing Map (SOM) [8] is an unsupervised neu-
ral network algorithm which adapts the codebook vectors 
of neurons so that they approximate the input data distri-
bution. When the training has converged topological areas 
or domains corresponding to certain types of inputs can be 
found from the map. The topology and the size of the net-
work is fixed before adaptation.
In the SOM algorithm, the codebook vectors wj of the 
SOM are at first initialized. Then, the following steps are 
repeated for each input vector x: Find the index of best- 
matching or nearest codebook vector using
i(x) = argminI Ix — wj I I,
in which j goes through all the neurons in the map. Next, 
the codebook vectors of winner neuron and its neighbors are 
updated using
wj (t + 1) = wj (t) + αhij (x)(x(t) — wj (t)).
Here, α is the learning rate and hij (x) is the neighborhood 
function centered around the winner neuron. Input sample 
x defines the winner neuron and the topological distance 
between indexes i and j defines how much the neuron is 
updated. Neighborhood function is typically Gaussian or 
bubble function i.e. function which decrease monotonically 
and even goes to zero when the distance increases.
In this paper, a batch version of the SOM algorithm is 
used. In batch SOM, all codebook vectors of the SOM are 
computed after the best-matching units of all input data 
vectors have been found. The same data set is used several 
times.
3. METHODS
Handover related measurement from 3G network can be 
analyzed using standard data mining methods [1]. In this
331
Table 1: Measurements in the analysis. Data set has one sample vector for each source target cell pair.
Variable	Explanation	Type
EcnoDiffNum	Computed Ec/N0 differences	number
EcnoDiffMean	Computed Ec/N0 differences	mean
EcnoDiffPdf-6.0	-6 dB bin of Ec/N0 difference pdf	ratio
EcnoDiffPdf-3.0	-3 dB bin of Ec/N0 difference pdf	ratio
EcnoDiffPdf0.0	0 dB bin of Ec/N0 difference pdf	ratio
EcnoDiffPdf3.0	3 dB bin of Ec/N0 difference pdf	ratio
t act	Target and source simultaneously in SHO	mean
t act dir	Time of target being in SHO with source	mean
tot time sho	Cell total time in SHO	sum
p act	Target in active set of source	ratio
SHO total att	SHO attempts to add Target to active set	number
add ratio	Successful attempts leading to addition	ratio
pfail total	Failures	number
pfail ini	Setup phase failures due to non-radio	ratio
pfail ini radio	Setup phase failures due to radio	ratio
pfail act	Active time failures due to non-radio	ratio
pfail act radio	Active time failures due to radio	ratio
p4th 5th	Cell is in monitored state (=4th or 5th)	ratio
av rscp ratio	Target / Source Received power ratio	mean
r fail	Ratio pfail total / SHO total att	ratio
r EcnoDNum	Ratio EcnoDiffNum / SHO total att	ratio
* Variable defined in the analysis.
study, methods presented in Figure 1 are used. At first, 
the miner have to decide what could be interesting in this 
data. The analysis task has to be defined. On basis of that 
the first choice of variables will be done. Next, the selected 
variables are preprocessed, in order to be able to use them 
in later analysis.
In data mining tasks, variable selection and preprocessing 
are the most critical phases, because in this step the miner 
decides which variables are important and how should they 
be processed. The whole data mining process consists of sev-
eral cycles performed repeatedly. The cycles include testing 
how different variable selections and preprocessing methods 
effect on final results. The process has inner loops in which 
some tasks or parameters are fixed on basis of selections 
made in outer loop. The inner loops are performed more 
frequently. Loops with more general task like the defini-
tion of mining task are repeated less frequently. When the 
mining task is defined the analyzer should be able to decide 
what is (s)he looking out for.
Now, the analysis task is defined as finding groups of sim-
ilarly behaving cell pairs in SHO situations. Importance of 
measurements can also be highlighted using proper weight-
ing of variables. In addition to clustering, also other tasks 
for data analysis can be defined. One possibility is to try to 
find cells or cell pairs with anomalous behavior. Anomalies 
can also be found by clustering, but expert knowledge in 
variable selection and preprocessing steps are very impor-
tant.
Using different variables, preprocessing methods and weight-
ing of variables different clustering results can be found. To 
find out which of them is useful, interpretation of clusters is 
needed. This can be done using histograms or rules defined 
by data samples falling in clusters. The results which have 
been found using clustering methods should be visualized 
together with spatial locations to be able to understand the 
usefulness of results. Methods should be performed repeat-
edly to analyze successive data sets under the knowledge of 
performed tuning operations. Thus, there is a possibility to 
find explanations to changing results. In this study, results 
of only one data set are shown, because more information 
on application domain is needed to be able to combine and 
compare successive clustering results.
3.1 Preprocessing
Different preprocessing methods have been tested. The 
final method was selected on basis of histograms and the 
clusters which were found using the selected method. At 
the first step, the distributions are truncated. Outliers in 
the selected variables were replaced by their maximum per-
mitted values. Two variables, pfail total and EcnoDiffNum, 
were scaled using the number of performed soft handover 
attempts (see Table 1). Logarithms of some of the variables 
were taken, but finally only scaled EcnoDiffNum was prepro-
cessed with logarithmic function. Sample vectors with high 
amount of undefined measurements were canceled. Used 
clustering method (see section 3.2) allows using sample vec-
tors in which some variables are undefined. However, they 
are not so useful when the rate of undefined values increases. 
Here, sample vectors with 15 or more missing values in 20 
variables are canceled.
In Figure 2 the histograms of the most interesting vari-
ables preprocessed using selected methods are visualized. 
Some of the variables have quite high peaks in distributions, 
but due to the origin of variables no other preprocessing 
have been performed. For example, handover failure reasons 
pfail ini, pfail ini radio, pfail act radio and pfail act sum up 
to unity. However, pfail act is not analyzed because it is zero 
all the time in the first data set.
332
Figure 1: Used data analysis method. Steps con-
nected with solid arrows have been performed.
3.2 Clustering
Cluster analysis is used to divide data vectors in groups. 
Data vectors falling in same cluster are similar with each 
other. Here, clustering is performed using a two-phase 
method [15]. In this method, data vectors are at first used 
to train a Self-Organizing Map. Neurons of the SOM adapt 
to incoming data so that the input data can in later analysis 
be represented by the codebook vectors of neurons. Number 
of these codebook vectors is much smaller than the number 
of original data vectors. Thus, computational complexity of 
the final crisp clustering algorithm is decreased. Another 
advantage of using a SOM based two-phase method instead 
of direct clustering of data vectors is the visualization capa-
bility of SOM.
In addition to preprocessing, SOM algorithm provides an-
other possibility to emphasize important properties of data. 
Larger weights in distance computation are given to the 
most important properties defined by the analyzer. Smaller 
or even zero weight can be given to those variables which 
are not used in organization of the SOM i.e. in building clus-
ters. However, values of them can be compared to those with 
larger weights using various visualization methods. Weight-
ing by variable importance can also be built into SOM train-
ing algorithm by utilizing learning distance metrics [7].
Figure 2: Logarithmic histograms after distribution 
cuts, logarithmic preprocessing of r EcnoDNum and 
scaling of all variables between [0,1]
The codebook vectors are further clustered using k-means 
or some hierarchical clustering method. In this paper, Ward 
agglomerative clustering method has been used [4]. In the 
beginning of hierarchical clustering, each codebook vector 
is a cluster of its own. In the next step, the most similar 
clusters are combined and this is continued until all vectors 
are in same cluster. The clustering results form a tree struc-
ture called dendrogram. In visualization of a dendrogram, 
the clusters combined in each step and the distance between 
them are shown. Final clustering is selected by cutting this 
tree at certain level. The number of clusters can be selected 
manually or some cluster validation index can be utilized 
to find the optimum. In this paper, Davies-Bouldin vali-
dation index has been used [3]. Similar clustering methods 
have earlier been used in the analysis of both GSM and 3G 
network BTSs [9, 11, 13].
As a result of clustering, each data vector is represented 
by index of one neuron or by the codebook vector stored in 
that neuron. Furthermore, the neuron and the data vectors 
the neuron represents belong to same cluster. On basis of 
the clustering result, some clusters can be selected for more 
specific analysis. Cluster selection is usually done on basis 
of found higher values of some critical variables. It is pos-
sible to build a system in which rules are found for clusters 
[14, 9] and these are used to select interesting clusters au-
tomatically. Here, interesting clusters are selected manually 
on basis of clusterwise variable mean values and histograms.
4. RESULTS
In this section, handover measurement data is used to 
train a Self-Organizing Map of size 17 x 12. Then, the code- 
book vectors of the SOM are clustered using hierarchical 
Ward method. Results of clustering are described and two 
clusters are then selected for more specific analysis. Charac-
teristics of sample vectors falling in those clusters are studied 
using histograms.
Only the most interesting variables are used to find the
Task definition
Variable selection
Clustering
Interpretation
of clusters
Preprocessing
Visualization 
with locations
Parameter tuning
333
nearest neuron of input data vector. These variables have 
nonzero mask which can also be considered as a weighting 
factor in a search for the best-matching neuron. Rest of 
the variables have zero mask, which means that they can 
be visualized and updated using SOM algorithm, but they 
do not have an effect on organization of the SOM and on 
selection of the cluster in which the sample belongs to.
In Figure 3 all other component planes of SOM with pos-
itive mask are shown, except Ec/N0 difference distributions 
which are shown in Figure 6. In component plane visual-
ization, distributions of components (or variables) of SOM 
codebook vectors are shown. Component values of one code- 
book vector are visualized using grayscaling and their locate 
in the same position at each plane. For example, values of 
one codebook vector are shown at upper right corner in each 
plane.
Figure 3: Component planes of SOM with denor-
malized scales. Shown variables have nonzero mask 
and they are not describing Ec/N0 difference distri-
butions.
Some component values which were not used in SOM 
training (i.e. they were masked out) are shown in Figure 
4. Although, they have no effect on SOM organization, they 
are adapted to be able to compare their distributions even 
with those used in organizing the SOM.
By visual comparison of variables in Figures 3 and 4, it can 
be seen that the total number of SHO attempts 
(SHO total att) and Ec/N0 difference measurements 
(EcnoDiffNum) is higher in upper part of the SOM. How-
ever, when the latter is scaled by total number of attempts, 
higher rate of measurements (r EcnoDNum) is in lower part 
of the map. Also, the total number of failuring SHO at-
tempts (pfail total) is high in upper right corner, but scal-
ing this by number of attempts tells us that the failure rate 
(r fail) in upper right corner is quite moderate. Instead, 
higher failure rates exists in both lower corners i.e. in clus-
ters 5 and 8 (see Figure 5).
Trained SOM codebook vectors are clustered using hier-
archical Ward algorithm. The clustering result selected by 
Davies-Bouldin index is shown in Figure 5. Four bin Ec/N0 
difference histograms are visualized on top of clustered SOM
Figure 4: Denormalized component planes of vari-
ables which were not used in SOM training.
in Figure 6. When component values of SOM (see Figures 
3, 4 and 6) are compared with clustering result (see Figure 
5) several types of source target pairs can be found. Most of 
them are behaving as expected, but some of them represent 
handover attempts with certain type of problems.
Figure 5: SOM which is clustered using hierarchical 
Ward method and Davies-Bouldin validation index.
To find out the most interesting clusters of the SOM for 
further investigations, distribution of data samples on SOM 
is visualized. In Figure 7a hits of all samples on SOM nodes 
are visualized and in Figure 7b hits of samples with SHO 
failure rate (r fail) larger than 22% are shown. Samples are 
distributed all over the map, only some edge nodes have 
slightly larger hit rate. Lower part of the map has more hits 
when samples with increased failure rate are considered.
In Figure 8 hits of samples which represent two differ-
334
(a) All	(b) SHO failure rate &gt; 22%
Figure 7: Sample vector hits on SOM nodes. Size of 
black hexagonal on SOM node denotes the number 
of hits. Maximum number of hits per node is shown 
above the plot.
Figure 6: EcnoDiff distributions on top of clustered 
SOM. In each SOM node a four bin Ec/N0 histogram 
is shown.
ent types of SHO failures are shown. Samples are from cell 
pairs in which the rate of selected type of failures is larger 
than 75%. However, handover initialization failures due to 
some other reason than radio channel resources (i.e. pfail ini 
type failures) are obviously more frequent than failures due 
to radio channel initialization problems (pfail ini radio type 
failures). Cell pairs with SHO failures originating mainly 
from these two reasons are mapped on separate clusters. 
All SHO failures due to radio channel initialization are in 
cluster 9 (see Figures 5 and 8b) and most of all other ini-
tialization failures are in cluster 5 (see Figures 5 and 8a). In 
the following, these two clusters are studied in more detail.
In Figures 9 and 10 histograms of samples which belong 
to clusters 5 and 9 are shown. These histograms should 
be compared with histograms of whole data set which were 
shown in Figure 2. In histograms of cluster 5 (see Figure 
9), the average received signal power ratio (av rscp ratio) is 
slightly lower than in general. Distributions of three largest 
Ec/N0 difference measurement bins are completely different 
than corresponding distributions from the whole data set. 
In cluster 5 most of the samples have about 3dB Ec/N0 dif-
ference (EcnodiffPdf3.0) which means that at least this mea-
surement makes successful SHOs possible and SHO should 
be performed. Exceptional Ec/N0 difference measurements
(a) pfail ini	(b) pfail ini radio
Figure 8: Hits of samples of two failure types. Sam-
ples of which more than 75% are failuring due to 
selected cause are counted.
of this cluster can also be seen in Figure 6. All the failing 
cell pairs fail in initialization due to other than radio chan-
nel reasons (pfail ini). Total rate of failures is very high 
(r fail). One reason for high rate of failures can be that all 
the capacity is in use.
In histograms of cluster 9 (see Figure 10), the average re-
ceived power ratios are a bit higher than usual, but there are 
no samples with high rate of 3dB Ec/N0 differences (EcnoD-
iffPdf3.0). However, in such a situation it should be possible 
to perform successful SHOs. The rate of initialization fail-
ures in radio channels (pfail ini radio) is higher than usually, 
but because only a small part of samples in this cluster have 
above mentioned problems the total SHO failure rate is not 
higher than usually. The total number of samples or cell 
pairs with high rate of initialization failures in SHO is so 
small, that it is impossible to make any further inferences 
from these clusters. It is possible to check histograms of 
only those samples which fulfill the failure rate criteria, but 
the number of samples is anyway quite low.
335
Figure 9: Histograms of data vectors of cluster 5.
Cell pairs with high rate of radio channel initialization 
failures in SHO attempts vary from data set to another, 
but without any information on network topology and with 
uncomplete information on performed tuning operations, it 
is impossible to make any further inferences.
Figure 10: Histograms of data vectors of cluster 9.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a data analysis method based on a neu-
ral network has been presented. The method is utilized in 
data visualization and clustering. The presented method is 
only one possibility for finding data clusters. However, the 
benefits of the proposed method are the decrease in compu-
tational complexity due to used two-phase clustering algo-
rithm and the visualization capability of the method. Thus, 
it is well suitable for this kind of explorative data analysis.
It is desirable to find clusters with characteristics which
differ from one cluster to another. In the presented method, 
selection of variables and variable weighting factors have 
been used to find interesting clusters. In the preprocess-
ing phase, also the number of permitted undefined measure-
ment values in sample vector has an effect on found clusters. 
Sample vectors with high rate of missing values are not so 
usable and describable as samples without them. Vectors 
with missing values can be used in the SOM training but 
the benefit of using them decreases when the rate of unde-
fined values increases.
In this study, histograms are used both when preprocess-
ing methods are decided and when an interpretation for the 
found clusters are looked for. However, clusters can also be 
compared using other visual methods, finding limiting rules 
for variable values in clusters or comparing distributions of 
variable values in clusters using more sophisticated distribu-
tion comparison measures like Kullback-Leibler divergences 
[6].
The results which have been obtained using all available 
data sets differ slightly from each other, but due to uncom-
plete information on network configuration and parameter 
tuning, further inferences cannot be made. However, adding 
this information would offer interesting possibilities to con-
tinue this study.
6. REFERENCES
[1] P. Chapman, J. Clinton, T. Khabaza, T. Reinartz, 
and R. Wirth. CRISP-DM 1.0 step-by-step data 
mining guide. Technical report, CRISM-DM 
consortium, 2000. http://www.crisp-dm.org.
[2] Y. Chen. Soft Handover Issues in Radio Resource 
Management for 3G WCDMA Networks. PhD thesis, 
Queen Mary, University of London, 2003.
[3] D. Davies and D. Bouldin. A cluster separation 
measure. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, 1(2):224–227, April 1979.
[4] B. Everitt. Cluster Analysis. Arnold, 1993.
[5] V. K. Garg. Wireless Network Evolution: 2G to 3G. 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2002.
[6] S. Haykin. Neural Networks, a Comprehensive 
Foundation. Macmillan, 1999.
[7] S. Kaski and J. Sinkkonen. Metrics that learn 
relevance. In Proceedings of the International Joint 
Conference on Neural Networks, volume 5, pages 
547–552, 2000.
[8] T. Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps. Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin, 1995.
[9] J. Laiho, K. Raivio, P. Lehtim¨aki, K. H¨at¨onen, and 
O. Simula. Advanced analysis methods for 3G cellular 
networks. IEEE Transactions on Wireless 
Communications, 4(3):930–942, May 2005.
[10] J. Laiho, A. Wacker, and T. Novosad, editors. Radio 
Network Planning and Optimisation for UMTS. John 
Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd., 2001.
[11] P. Lehtim¨aki and K. Raivio. A SOM based approach 
for visualization of GSM network performance data. 
In IEA/AIE, pages 588–598, 2005.
[12] R. Prakash and V. Veeravalli. Locally optimal soft 
handoff algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular 
Technology, 52(2):347–356, March 2003.
[13] K. Raivio, O. Simula, and J. Laiho. Neural analysis of
mobile radio access network. In IEEE International
336
Conference on Data Mining, pages 457–464, San Jose, 
California, USA, November 29 - December 2 2001.
[14] M. Siponen, J. Vesanto, O. Simula, and P. Vasara. An
approach to automated interpretation of SOM. In
N. Allinson, H. Yin, L. Allinson, and J. Slack, editors, 
Advances in Self-Organizing Maps, pages 89–94. 
Springer, 2001.
[15] J. Vesanto and E. Alhoniemi. Clustering of the 
self-organizing map. IEEE Transactions on Neural 
Networks, 11(3):586–600, May 2000.
[16] J. Zander. Radio Resource Management for Wireless 
Networks. Artech House, Inc., 2001.
337
