CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Understanding Geocaching Practices and Motivations
Kenton O’Hara
Hewlett-Packard Labs
Filton Road
Bristol, UK
ABSTRACT
Geocaching is a location-based activity that has been 
practiced for a number of years. As a sustained and 
established activity it represents an important opportunity 
for understanding everyday practices and motivations that 
can build up around a location-based activity. We present 
findings from a field study of everyday geocaching 
behaviour. In contrast to previous work, we take a broad 
perspective on the activity focussing beyond the in situ 
consumption of these experiences. We look, too, at the 
practices and motivations surrounding participants’ creation 
of these experiences. Further, we examine these behaviours 
within the social context of the on-line community that 
provides a significant basis for many of these behaviours. 
We use the findings to discuss broader implications for 
location-based experiences.
Author Keywords
Geocache, location-based computing, GPS (Global 
Positioning System), diary study, interviews.
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
Geocaching is the practice of hiding a container in a 
particular location, then publishing the latitude and 
longitude coordinates of the location on a geocaching web 
site [e.g. 7] for other “geocachers” to find using a GPS 
device. In essence it a kind a GPS-enabled treasure hunt. 
Ever since the first geocache was hidden in 2000, the hobby 
has grown considerably and now there are several hundred 
thousand caches hidden worldwide [7, 13, 21, 22].
Within the domain of location-based computing, geocaching 
represents an interesting and important object of study. As a 
technology-enabled location-based activity, it has various 
attributes that make it significant to understand both in itself 
but also to inform our more general understanding of 
location-based computing practices. First, it is a location- 
based experience that has established and sustained itself 
over several years. This allows us a perspective on a 
location-based experience that is difficult to get from limited 
time and place field trials of technology prototypes that, for
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
good practical reasons, have typified much user research on 
location-based applications. As authors such as [5, 19, 20] 
would argue, these limited field trial studies are not 
designed to explore the emergent everyday practices with 
technologies, the factors that shape these practices, and the 
social meaning they acquire as they as they become 
integrated into people’s everyday lives. A study of 
geocaching affords us the opportunity to get this longer term 
perspective on practices with a location-based experience.
Second, with geocaching, people participate not just through 
the consumption of location-based experiences but also 
through the creation of these experiences for others. User 
participation in the creation of location-based experiences is 
an established vision within UbiComp [e.g. 10, 11, 14, 23] 
but again has not been significantly explored as an ongoing 
everyday practice. An understanding of user creation 
practices and motivations, through the lens of geocaching, 
then, is informative to this broader UbiComp agenda – in 
particular, in light of the emerging crop of toolkits and 
applications designed to give consumers the ability to author 
and publish their own location-based experiences [6, 8, 9, 
10, 14].
Third, geocaching is of interest because it is comprised of 
both location-based elements and on-line elements. 
Understanding the diverse relationship between in situ and 
on-line behaviours is an important area of interest for 
UbiComp. Indeed, it has begun to be explored through 
several other interesting pieces of work [e.g. 1, 2, 16]. But 
our understanding of this area is in its infancy and there is 
need to map out other aspects of this relationship. 
Geocaching provides a new lens through which to explore 
another instantiation of the relationship between in situ and 
the on-line. Again significant in developing our 
understanding here is that geocaching is an established and 
ongoing practice with a large on-line community.
With this in mind, then, we present a study of geocaching 
practices and the social/contextual factors shaping them as 
they are enacted and given meaning in everyday life.
WHAT IS GEOCACHING?
As we have mentioned geocaching is a technology-enabled 
treasure-hunt but it is worth elaborating further on this basic 
description and key variants of the game to better 
understand the findings. A typical cache consists of a small 
waterproof container which can be hidden anywhere in the 
world. The latitude and longitude coordinates are noted and 
then published on a web site. The predominant website is 
geocaching.com [7]. A cache will contain a “log book” (to 
be signed and dated by those finding the cache) and
1177
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
potentially “treasure” depending on the size of the cache 
(sizes range from film canister “microcaches” to large 
ammunition boxes). Such “treasure” is generally low in 
value, consisting of novelty trinkets, small toys, coins and 
travel bugs (see later for description). Participants 
exchange this treasure – if they take something from the 
cache they must leave something of similar value. The basic 
caches are known as Traditional Caches, but some variants 
on this basic theme are worth noting. One variant is a Multi 
Cache in which participants go to several caches to get 
enough information to work out coordinates to a final cache 
containing the log book and treasure. A second variant is 
the Puzzle Cache where participants solve a puzzle to work 
out the coordinates of a cache. On the web site, each cache 
has its own dedicated web page. As well as the coordinates, 
this web page contains contextual information about the 
cache and the site, maps of starting points, a puzzle to work 
out the coordinates, and useful tips or things to look out for. 
Each cache has a 2-digit rating of difficulty: one digit rating 
difficulty of terrain; a second rating difficulty of the puzzle 
(a 5-5 is the most difficult). Logs for the cache and any 
related photos can also be posted on a cache’s web page.
PREVIOUS WORK ON GEOCACHING
Over the years, a lot has been written about geocaching. 
Much of this writing is short or journalistic in nature, 
providing a brief overview of the activity and commenting 
on various interesting anecdotal curiosities. There are also 
useful guide articles and books to the activity which provide 
more detail about the ins and outs of geocaching and how to 
take part [e.g. 17, 21, 22, 24]. Other writings focus on 
things such as forestry management concerns associated 
with the activity or the potential of geocaching for 
educational purposes [12, 24]. However such articles do not 
say much about how people partake in this activity on an 
everyday basis and an understanding of practice and 
motivation that can be informative for design.
In terms of formal study of the area, it is surprisingly hard to 
find published research on the topic. Perhaps the most 
significant and well known study is that done by Chavez and 
Schneider [3, 4]. This research was based around a 
questionnaire administered to practicing geocachers. As well 
as demographic breakdown of geocachers and quantification 
of average number of caches found and made, the study also 
begins to provide a quantitative characterisation of 
underlying motivations. These include for example, 
relaxation, being close to nature, and doing something with 
family. While these provide a useful starting point for our 
understanding there is very little in the way of rich 
qualitative detail. As such, the research does not really shed 
light on the details of geocaching in a way that could be 
informative to design. The study authors themselves make a 
call for future complementary research to explore more in- 
depth qualitative aspects of geocaching. We start to get 
more qualitative insights into practices through the work of 
Margot Kelley [13]. In her book, she presents various 
geocaching anecdotes that illustrate certain attributes of the 
activity and then offers a commentary that brings it all 
together. As well as some insight into practice, one of the
notable contributions of the book is to highlight the 
importance of the geocaching community (and associated 
issues such as trust and reciprocity) as opposed to just the 
activity itself. This social context within which the activity 
takes place turns out to be an important basis for 
understanding behaviour and motivations and is something 
that we return to in our analysis. Ultimately though, the 
concerns of her book are not with technology design and 
understanding, so practices are not viewed through an 
analytic lens that informs our concerns here. Consequently, 
additional research needs to be done within this context.
In much of the writing on geocaching, too, there is a 
tendency to focus only on the in situ consumption aspects of 
the experience that relate to searching for a cache. In terms 
of understanding everyday practices and motivations such a 
focus is too narrow. It ignores other points of participation 
in the activity such as the creation and publishing of caches 
by people and participation in the on-line community 
(Kelley [13] is an exception here and does break away from 
this focus to an extent in her discussion of on-line 
community). This is not simply a question of identifying the 
additional factors and motivations associated with these 
additional aspects. Rather, these different aspects of the 
experience are intimately bound up with each other. On-line 
participation shapes the in situ experience and vice versa. 
Likewise, participation in the creation of caches shapes 
motivations for on-line participation. In contrast to previous 
work, then, we take a more holistic view of the activity, 
combining both creation and consumption elements, as well 
as on-line and in situ aspects of the experience.
THE STUDY
Participants
We recruited 14 geocachers from the UK. Of these ten were 
male and 4 female (this gender bias is consistent with the 
breakdown in the study by Chavez and Schneider [3, 4]), 
with an age range from 20s to 60s. Some additional 
perspective on young children geocachers were provided by 
participants who were parents and grandparents and had 
been geocaching with their children. Participants covered a 
range of geocaching experience, some being very early to 
the activity with less than ten finds and others with many 
years experience and several hundred finds to their name. In 
selecting participants, the aim was not to create the basis for 
statistical comparisons across different types of users and 
experience levels (which would not be appropriate with 
such a sample size). Rather, in an exploratory study like 
this, the aim was to provide an opportunity for issues 
particular to different types of user to be raised in the study. 
Participants were given £40.00 vouchers for partaking in the 
study.
Method
The method was based around a diary study augmented by 
in-depth interviews. Participants were asked to keep a diary 
of their geocaching-related activities over a three week 
period. The events to record were not simply about going 
on a cache itself but pertained also to the broader set of 
activities surrounding it. This included any on-line logging 
posting comments, posting photos, research around a
1178
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
particular cache, trip planning, making and publishing a 
cache etc. For each episode, they were asked to record the 
nature of the activity, when and where the behaviour took 
place, and any artefacts involved. Where practical we also 
asked participants to take photos of the episode location to 
provide further context for understanding the behaviour.
Interviews were carried out with participants both before 
and after the 3 week period. A preliminary interview before 
the trial period introduced participants to the study and 
established background context about the participants (age, 
lifestyle, work life, family life and level of geocaching 
experience). The primary interview was conducted as soon 
as possible after the diary period and was based around the 
recorded events. This interview lasted between 60 and 90 
minutes. During this interview, participants provided more 
detailed descriptions of each episode, the context 
surrounding them and any underlying motivations.
FINDINGS
In this section we start with a brief overview of participation 
behaviour among participants before turning our attention to 
some of the underlying social values and motivations that 
shape behaviour. There was a huge range among the 
participants in terms of how often they went on a 
geocaching trip. For the casual cachers, it was something 
they would do every few months, typically during school 
holiday times. For the more keen geocachers, it was 
something that would go on a trip most weekends and in the 
evenings where possible. But they would also interleave 
geocaching with other aspects of their lives, 
opportunistically fitting it in where they could. That is, 
there were times when geocaching was not the primary 
reason for being in a place but that it was sometimes slotted 
in opportunistically around other activities. A good example 
here is of a cacher who was visiting a friend to watch a 
soccer match. He and his partner drove over to the friend’s 
house and parked the car outside the friend’s house. Instead 
of going in the house he left his partner in the car and 
nipped across the road to a park where he knew a cache was. 
He spent 10 minutes looking for the cache and then returned 
to the car to get his partner before going in the house.
“We were going round to a friends house to watch the England 
Israel game and there happens to be one in the Park next to his 
house – so we parked up the car – I leapt out and ran across to the 
park to see if I could find it. ”
Int: “What did the friend think?”
“I don’t think he was aware of it – they would find it a little 
peculiar... The main thought going through my head was that I was 
going to miss kick off and that my wife was in the car waiting for 
me – I said if we had time I would pop in on the way – I think she 
thinks it was one of my sad hobbies – she doesn’t get particularly 
enthused about it... It was probably a 10 minute round trip from 
leaving the car to getting back to the car. ”
A number of participants would try and get out during lunch 
breaks at work to find local caches. Others would combine 
it with journeys, stopping off on the way to somewhere else 
in order to find a cache. The more experienced and 
enthusiastic cachers were also reactive in their behaviour 
responding, for example, to the publication of new caches.
But there were additional touch points to the activity that 
allowed participants to maintain participation through on-
line engagement with the web site and through new cache 
creation and research. For the inexperienced cachers, much 
of this “in between” behaviour was based around finding of 
a particular cache to do or to log a find and so was relatively 
infrequent. However for more enthusiastic cachers, these 
in-between participation points provided an ongoing 
nurturing of their interest. This monitoring activity 
happened daily or every few days through routine visits to 
the geocaching.com web site and through regular email 
alerts. Through the web site and its tracking facilities, these 
cachers monitored the arrival of new caches and new log 
entries for their own caches and built up an awareness of the 
cache landscape in their local area, around their home, their 
work, or other places where they visited on a regular basis.
“I just do half an hour to quickly go through – just to see what is 
happening locally – any new ones I put into my Garmin so that 
they are all on there – so that if we happen to come here I can look 
at it to see what is local to here – I wouldn’t necessarily come from 
Shirehampton to here just to find that one across the road – it’s 
been there some time and it’s not that important to me but because 
we are here why not do it. ”
“I am conscious of where they all are in Cheltenham. So if ever I 
am passing them I will probably have a nose around”
This monitoring behaviour is important in enabling their 
more opportunistic geocaching, and, as we shall see later the 
basis for some of the motivations based around collecting 
and friendly rivalry among fellow cachers.
Motivations for Caching
Social Walking
One of the primary motivations for doing a geocache was 
because it created an opportunity to get out and walk. In 
this respect it is important to think about the activity not 
simply as a destination or a find. Rather, an integral part of 
the experience is the getting there. An important question 
then is why people simply didn’t just go on a walk. What is 
significant is how caching was used by people to give a 
walk a sense of purpose. This sense of purpose helped 
motivate participants to walk and engage in physical activity 
and without which they would be less inclined to go.
“Helen and I aren’t keen walkers. It’s the only way to get us out is 
to put a geocache at the end. It’s a good way of getting people 
who don’t like to walk much to get out and do a walk.”
“I doubt I would stop at the bottom of the hill and think – oh I’ll go 
for a walk up there. It’s not likely but when you think there is a 
cache up there I would do it. My incentive is that cache at the top 
of the hill.”
This lack of motivation to walk was particularly notable 
among children. Several parents commented how they 
wanted to get their children out of their rooms and away 
from the computer but that it was difficult to do this simply 
by suggesting going for a walk for no purpose. Indeed such 
suggestions by parents would often be met with moans from 
the children and a rather reluctant inclination to the walk. 
Caching provided a reason that walking in itself did not.
“It’s another goal though – if I am taking the children on another 
dog walk they will be complaining about the fact that they have to
1179
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
go on a dog walk. It’s nice to get them out and stretch their legs. 
They like walking but if you are trying to get them out of their 
darkened bedroom where they have got World of Warcraft to play 
on – so in order to entice them out is was just another thing – 
another aim of the trip – not just to go for a blind walk but to 
actually go and find a geocache – so. ” SA
Getting the kids out was a real practical concern for parents 
and the motivations for getting them to participate were 
varied. Parents were keen for their children to get out and 
experience nature, engage in some form of exercise and 
even to explicitly provide the children with alternative 
options to activities based purely on consumption. For 
another parent, geocaching with the children was a way for 
her to engage in an activity which helped her lose weight 
looking after the children. For others, it was a way simply 
to spend time with the children. More broadly, while 
geocaching at times was an isolated activity, in the main 
participants regarded it as a way to spend time with partners, 
family and friends.
In light of this mixture of motivations there are several 
notable characteristics of the activity and technology use. 
First is the level of immersion demanded by the technology. 
Relative to some location-based experiences, the use of the 
GPS devices here is actually relatively backgrounded. That 
is, the GPS is only referred to by people when necessary for 
navigation purposes. It is also notable from the perspective 
of allowing nature to be enjoyed rather than dominated by 
an overly immersive experience. It does not demand the 
continuous attention of individuals enabling ongoing social 
interaction of the group (in contrast to more immersive 
location-based experiences such as audio tours can do). As 
a consequence, the technology and activity design here 
enable the ongoing social interaction among the group that 
is such an important factor in the enjoyment of the activity. 
It also means that a single device is easily shared among a 
group.
An additional aspect of supporting this social behaviour was 
the differentiated level of participation afforded by the 
activity. That is, different members of a social group could 
contribute to different degrees yet still be part of the social 
occasion, making the activity very flexible in terms of 
participation and social inclusivity. For example, one 
participant described how the family would go out 
geocaching. His wife was not particularly bothered about 
geocaching per se but she enjoyed the fact that they would 
be going out for a walk as a family. Her involvement then 
was relatively peripheral except she would occasionally get 
involved if there were any puzzles to do in order to find the 
coordinates. Likewise, participants talked how they would 
go out geocaching with friends who were not into 
geocaching but they would come along to “hang out”. Other 
aspects of this differentiated participation were apparent 
with children where parents would make an effort to 
explicitly involve them, typically letting the children do the 
final part of the search once they were in the vicinity of the 
cache.
“Usually when you get to a place you let one of the kids find the 
box, open it, look through it, find the coins and write in the log 
[book].”
Discovering and Exploring Places
A key motivation underlying participation was its use as a 
way of discovering new places to go. In this respect, it was 
not so much the finding of a cache that was primary but 
where it led to as a consequence of doing this treasure hunt.
“And also the opportunity to go to new places – ’cause they are 
generally in places of quite natural beauty and interest. Things 
that you would normally pass by. There are so many places I have 
driven by and never stopped and then you stop and you still can’t 
see anything until you go hunting for the cache and you realise 
there is a fantastic little haven of natural beauty somewhere – so 
we’ve found loads of really great places... That’s the reason I do it 
– new places – because we go out with the dog we are always 
looking for new places to go. The same place gets boring.”
What is significant here is that caches are not placed in 
random hiding places but rather are located in places of 
natural beauty or significance. By virtue of looking for these 
caches, participants discovered these interesting or beautiful 
places that otherwise they simply would not know about. 
Geocaching as an activity then was being used by people as 
a form of social recommendation about places – a way to 
explore and discover. For some, this discovery was a 
passive process in the sense that participants find new places 
by virtue of doing geocaching. But we also saw how some 
participants were more active in their use of the activity in 
the discovery and exploration of a place. For example, one 
participant who travelled regularly with work used caching 
to find out about the area he was staying rather than just 
remaining in a hotel. Others used it on holiday to help find 
places that were perhaps more off the beaten track and 
dependent on the local knowledge of the person placing the 
cache. But it was more than just a social recommendation. 
There were times too when the caching provided people 
with a structure to their exploration. For example, with 
certain caches participants were directed to look at particular 
features in the environment for clues in order to find the 
final GPS coordinates for a cache. This encouraged them to 
look at places in different ways than if they were not 
caching.
This discovery process also applied to the local area where 
people live where one might expect them to have good local 
knowledge. But such local knowledge is often built upon 
particular routines of their everyday life. In this sense there 
are the same places that you go to regularly out of habit and 
out of function. Geocaching helped people break out of a 
routine way of experiencing their local environment to 
discover places they never knew existed.
“That is the main thing we have found in Reading – we’ve lived in 
Reading for about 4 years now but every time we find a new wood 
or a new park – I never knew this park and lakes existed up by 
Woodley – and its actually a lovely place to go for a picnic or to 
the lake or whatever – I didn’t know what was up there.” PD
In addition, one participant commented how he had stopped 
thinking about his local area as a beautiful place to live – to 
him it was functional and his experience was shaped by his
1180
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
routines and those around him. As an example he would 
walk a particular path everyday to take his children to 
school. At that particular time of day it was busy and there 
was lots of traffic noise and so he had stopped appreciating 
it. But when he read comments left by some geocachers 
about a cache local to him, remarking what a beautiful and 
tranquil area it was, it made him reflect on it and look at his 
local area in a different way.
Collecting
As an activity, geocaching was more than just the sum of the 
individual caching experiences. For many of the 
participants, there was a “collecting” ethos that was a 
significant part of the experience. The geocaching web site 
keeps a record of all the different caches a particular cacher 
or caching team have done. Their “collection” of cache finds 
as a whole was a demonstrable record of what they have 
achieved. Building this up was an important and ongoing 
driver for continued participation. Participants mentioned 
that they would not want to give this up visible sense of 
achievement. In this respect we cannot look for 
motivational and behavioural factors simply within the 
context of an isolated geocache experience. The 
significance and meaning of the next cache is dependent 
upon the context of what they have already collected and 
achieved.
While in some senses this motivation might be regarded as 
rather trivial it had important behavioural consequences. As 
with other kinds of collecting behaviour [15, 18], 
participants set particular goals to achieve For example:
“We set our own goal to try and do every cache within the first 
page where you log in – the places where you live. These are all 
the caches – by gradually extending radius – we try and do every 
single cache on that page. That changes as caches, either new ones 
are inserted or old ones are suspended. I think Alex set that. We 
did manage to do it last year but we are behind now again.”
What is important here was not simply that people set these 
goals but that these goals became an extra incentive and 
driver to continued and more frequent participation. As we 
can see from the following quotes these goals created a 
sense of urgency to get out there and do more caching. 
Completing the goals created a sense of achievement
“We have been aiming to get to our 100th in a year of caching – 
which meant rather a lot in March... ’cause we had fallen 
behind... It was an achievable goal. We were fairly close to it. 
Let’s see if we can get the 100 in–and it forces you. If you becomes 
a bit lethargic and can’t be bothered, if you have a goal like that 
you think well maybe 3 or 4 this weekend and I’ll be alright.”
“For me it’s a bit like a mine field. It’s like minesweeping. I like to 
clear the 5Km area around me of all geocaches and that’s my 
weird way of doing it. If someone releases a new one within 5 km I 
have to go out and do it straight away.”
Others would celebrate particular milestones such as 50th, 
100th, 200th etc. and would do something special for these:
“People seem to mark their 100th 200th etc for whatever it is. They 
say I think I’ll pick a good one for my 100th. One that looks like a 
real challenge.”
This particular motivation of collecting was important
because there were times when the experience became about 
the numbers. It was quite typical for people to do multiple 
caches in a day and some of the keen participants would be 
disappointed with less than 10 finds on a caching daytrip.
Profile and statistics 
Part of the value of these collecting practices within 
geocaching comes from being immersed within the social 
context of the geocaching community. As discussed in the 
social psychology literature on collecting, a person’s 
collection becomes bound up with doing identity work [15]. 
Consequently, there was value not simply in these collecting 
achievements per se but how they came to be represented to 
others. With this in mind, it is important to consider the 
ways this was enabled through the on-line environment and 
how this inextricably tied the location-based experience 
with accompanying on-line behaviour.
Basic logging capabilities are available to all members of 
the geocaching.com web site. These essentially document 
all the caches that a user finds and owns, differentiating 
them according cache type. For some of the participants in 
the study, these basic capabilities were a sufficient 
representation of their activities and did not require any 
investment of effort to achieve this value. For others, 
though, the presentation of their profile was an important 
concern for them. These participants would exploit 
additional capabilities of premium membership and other 
third party software to introduce further statistical 
representations of their activity into their profiles. For 
example, they would include maps of counties they had 
cached in, number of “5-5” rated caches (for terrain 
difficulty and puzzle difficulty), days since last find, rate of 
finds. Some participants also posted photographs of their 
caching activities on their profile. As identity resources, 
these became another source of engagement for the 
participants.
In some senses these profiles had important functional 
value. Participants used them on a regular basis to interpret 
comments posted in the cache logs. Consider, for example, 
“Did not find” was a common comment within the cache 
logs. From a prospective cacher’s perspective it was 
important to be able to interpret these DNF comments to 
make a judgment about whether to go to a particular cache 
or not. Participants used information in the profiles to assess 
the level of experience of a comment author to know 
whether it was serious or not. Or they would use it to glean 
any clues about a cache owner that might help them solve 
clues to a particular puzzle cache.
“If someone goes to a cache and says they can’t find it or says its 
lost then you – and I want to do that one because it is one my route 
– you look at their profile and if it says 500 caches found its pretty 
certain its not there. If they have only found 10 you think they are 
not into it and it’s a bit harder to find that others. That’s the 
reason I look at their profile. Or to see what their job is – if they 
have a puzzle cache you look at their job to see what inspired them 
to work out that blasted puzzle.”
But many participants also inspected these profiles for less 
functional purposes, simply out of curiosity.
1181
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
“Generally I find it fascinating to see. It’s nosiness really. The 
fact that you can click on their profile, see where they live and see 
how many they have done. I clicked on it because they have 
collected the item. I will click on it if they own an item or if it’s 
their cache. I guess because I only know one other person who 
does this it is intriguing to know who else does this.”
First to find: competition and urgency
We discussed earlier how the numbers game was an 
important driver for continued participation in geocaching 
activity. But there were other aspects of the activity which 
created compulsion and urgency among participants to get 
out there and search for a geocache. Again, such 
behavioural drivers lay outside the immediate bounds of the 
in situ cache experience itself. They arose because these 
experiences were performed within the context of the on-
line community. The most notable example discussed by 
participants was the practice of being “First-to-Find” a 
newly published cache and the particular kudos associated 
with this.
“A lot of people, their kudos is to be the first to find one. So when 
one is published you almost certainly know that it is going to be 
found within hours.”
When discussing this phenomenon with the participants, it 
was notable how the same two names cropped up again and 
again, namely Valiant Knight and Captain Gore-Tex. But 
what was interesting is how the dominance of these two 
cachers among the community actually generated a sense of 
friendly rivalry among the rest of the community. For most 
people, it was not a practical possible to regularly compete 
on first to finds. However it is something they wanted to do 
when the possibility of a “first-to-find” came up and was 
something that practically achievable for them. This would 
generate a huge drive to get out there and beat Valiant 
Knight or Captain Gore-Tex to the find.
“Or a new one pops up. That is the other thing that will draw you 
out – an email saying new. As soon as that is published, first-to-
find, lets get out there. It is a race then. There are some that is 
their goal in life: Valiant Knight and Gore-Tex. That is their thing, 
time and time again... So part of you just wants to beat them. Our 
first first-to-find was an absolute beauty. I had been in London 
working all day. I was on the train coming back and Fran said do 
you fancy doing a cache 7 o’clock at night – and I said no not 
really and he said well there is one out there that Gore-Tex has 
logged as can’t find and its near to Yatton station. So I got into the 
station at 8 o’clock and you drove there – and this is the madness 
of it – two cars at Yatton station. It’s dark and wet. I’ve done a 12 
hour day and haven’t eaten tea and I’m rummaging around in the 
hedgerow looking for a little film canister so that we can get first- 
to -find but it was more a case of so that we can be Captain Gore- 
Tex – and we took high delight in writing a log saying ‘I don’t 
know what you are talking about mate it’s there’ - it’s all in fun 
andjest.”
“When we first-to-find. The email went off as we were going out to 
a school play and it was on the Downs a few hundred yards from 
the front door. I couldn’t let Gore-Tex beat me to that one and then 
we went out. That was the closest to the geekiness I had got to 
going out to find the geocache with a torch. It was dark. It was 
8.15 in the winter.”
To make a detour while on the way to a school play in the 
middle of a dark winter’s evening is recognised by the
participant as slightly irrational and geeky. This particular 
participant was not an especially obsessive geocacher. But 
what is illustrated is just the level of compulsion that this 
friendly competition among the community can generate in 
terms of driving participation.
This desire also drove the emergence of related behaviours 
among participants such as increased monitoring of the site 
for new caches, subscription to email alerts for newly 
published caches and even the use of web enabled 
handhelds to obtain up to date information in the moment.
“Valiant Knight and Captain Gore-tex are a nightmare. He is like 
a First to Find junkie and this why I started the alerts off – will I 
get there before the Valiant Knight gets there.”
Challenge: individual and social aspects 
For many participants, one of the key driving factors for 
ongoing participation was that geocaching provided a 
number of sources of challenge.
“I mean it’s a terrific challenge to be able to find it. I suppose that 
is it – it’s a challenge. I don’t like to be beaten. The longest we 
have spent looking is about an hour and a half and I don’t like to 
give up until I have found it. ”
This is in line with the claims made in [18] about the 
location-based technologies providing value not simply by 
making it easy to get information at the right place and time 
but also by making it difficult. As we can see from the 
above quote, there was a sense that participants did not want 
to be beaten and will spend what on the face of it seems 
rather an irrational amount of time trying to locate the cache. 
But this gives a sense of the commitment to the challenge 
and level of motivation. Others spoke of how they would 
reluctantly give up on a particular occasion, but would often 
revisit the site again in an attempt to try again.
For the Puzzle Caches there was also the additional 
challenge of solving problems to discover the particular 
coordinates for the cache. What was significant about these 
puzzles was they required a large amount of time investment 
to solve them and much of this work occurs away from the 
cache site. Because of this distribution of the experience 
away from the actual cache location, participants would 
sometimes email the cache owners to confirm that they had 
correctly solved the puzzle before embarking on a long 
journey to actually find the cache. This extension of the 
experience beyond the cache site was also an important part 
of how people maintained participation in the activity even 
when not convenient to be out and about. For example, 
when weather conditions were not suitable for the outdoor 
aspects of a location-based experience.
“We tend to spend more time with puzzle caches in the winter 
because you can sit round a table in the pub or at home and you 
can solve the puzzle caches nearby and go and do them on a nice 
day. ”
“The problem solving took me a lot longer. Three weeks it took me. 
Every few hours going in and having a look and a few weeks later 
going in and having a look trying to work it out. A couple of 
lunchtimes sat in the office with a couple of colleagues to see if I 
can help you, that sort of thing. We did 5 over Christmas that were 
based on anagrams. You had to solve the anagrams before 
working out the coordinates and I had the whole family over
1182
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Christmas doing anagrams trying to work out these damns things – 
so you can get people to help you. ”
While these challenges are in some sense about personal 
achievement it is important to consider social elements 
underlying them in terms of opportunities for social action 
but also in terms of reputation among the community. As 
we see from the quote above, solving these puzzles was at 
times a collective effort in which participants solved them 
with friends, family or work colleagues.
The final stage of the cache search too became an 
opportunity for social occasioning. We discussed aspects of 
this in relation to children performing the final search when 
caching with their parents. Rather than efficiency concerns 
here, parents used the search to set a challenge for their 
children. These search opportunities were also appropriated 
by cachers for a form of localised play, introducing a 
competition among the local group for who will find it first.
The other aspect of problem solving and challenge where 
there was an underlying social element concerns reputation 
among the broader community. Participants were driven to 
choose particular puzzles or caches that were hard because 
this gave them credibility among the community
“I like the ones that are hard to find because there is a bit more of 
a reputation to be gained from doing a hard one. ”
There was great satisfaction to be had by participants 
finding a cache for which previous cachers had reported a 
succession of “Did Not Finds”. This starts to explain why, 
as was discussed above, many cachers did not like to give 
up their search. The reporting of a “Did Not Find” within 
the social context of the community was a public admission 
of defeat. In this respect the on-line activity with its social 
underpinning was intimately bound up with behaviours that 
take place in situ at the cache site itself.
Travel Bugs and Coins
In this section we discuss key artefacts within geocaching, 
namely “travel bugs” and “geo-coins” (collectively known 
as “travellers”) and the behaviours and social motivations 
that occur with and through them. These are physical 
artefacts with unique IDs, which get moved from cache to 
cache by participants who log them in and out of caches 
using the geocaching website. The very simplicity of the 
idea of moving from cache to cache allowed them to be 
appropriated for a variety of creative purposes. Participants 
created “missions” for these travellers such as “travel as far 
north as possible”, “travel to as many countries as possible”, 
“get to Sydney Opera House as quickly as possible.” 
Participants also attached small objects of significance (e.g. 
fluffy toys etc) and these become incorporated into the 
missions.
“We have also released our own bug. Alex gave it the mission of 
getting to Sydney opera house which is did in 10 days. Quite 
amazing isn’t it. Picture of the family who took it there with it and 
now it’s stuck slightly north of Sydney.”
There are a number of important issues to draw out here. 
First is that these missions invited a collective participation. 
By putting a traveller out there, participants invite others to 
contribute to the mission. Collective responsibility and trust
are important here. By picking up a traveller a participant 
accepted responsibility to help. This created an expectation 
to move the traveller on. This was significant because there 
was a moral obligation and social pressure to move it on 
creating a sense of urgency to go and do another cache. 
This contributed to a cycle of continued participation.
“Sometimes you feel a bit pressurised because once you have got 
one you have to move and put it somewhere and hopefully 
whatever its target is and if you haven’t been out for a couple of 
weeks and you are holding onto it and someone is expecting you to 
move it on you think well we had better go out. ”
Creating missions was also an opportunity for social 
engagement and play among the immediate social groups 
such as family and caching friends. Several participants 
described how they designed travel bug missions to create 
competitions between themselves.
“Ah well I was having a race with my mates TB – he started his in 
Birmingham and I started mine in Bristol and the idea was that the 
first to get to each others caches – so we raced mine from Bristol 
to Birmingham and his from Birmingham to Bristol- they both went 
at the same time. Mine ended up somewhere bizarre and then down 
to Cornwall to a cache that was so difficult to do people only did it 
once every 6 months so mine spent 6 months down in Cornwall in a 
cache that I actually went down to find so that I could bring it back 
and start it again – but I actually couldn’t find it so it was a 
pointless trip for me and eventually mine made its way to 
Birmingham.”
Again what is significant about this behaviour is the way 
that playful appropriation of the artefacts became a basis for 
a greater participation frequency. The competitive spirit 
created encouraged specific trips to engage in this location- 
based activity so as to beat his friend.
People also created dependencies between different 
travellers which again became another way of creating urges 
to go out and cache. In one example, one geocacher had 
released four travel coins in different caches around the 
South West region of the UK. The aim of the mission 
attached to the coins was to combine all 4 coins together to 
get the location clue and to take a photo of them all together.
“That is another thing that might inspire us to go out – the goal is 
to take a photo of these things together – we had one and then went 
to look at its goal – that’s when we found that you had to get the 
other half of it and take a photograph. So we put it on our watch 
list so that if it got put anywhere and lo and behold it got put up at 
Weston house which is about 10 miles – and we’d been out caching 
all day and we’d had an awful day. It was Jan 1 st or something – 
not great weather. So we got back here and saw the email and it 
was about 9 o’clock and off we went to find it in the dark with 
security lights and everything.”
Of note in this quote is the on-line tracking behaviour that 
occurred around these artefacts. Participants would go to 
the geocaching web site to see where particular coins were 
and which caches they were logged into. When the coins 
were in a convenient cache they would go out to collect it. 
Again this shows the important relationship between the on-
line behaviours and the location specific aspects of the 
activity.
Such tracking of “travellers” was also of significance to
1183
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
those who actually released the travel bugs in the first place. 
Several participants spoke of their simple fascination with 
the physical movement of these artefacts around the world, 
how far they go and just how quickly they get moved 
around by the collective action of the other geocachers. “I 
find that interesting to see how they travel. I am surprised 
some of these things move so far.”
While the experience of this location tracking is performed 
in the on-line world, what is important here is the physical 
movement of the object around the world by other people. 
While it is easy to imagine the implementation of a virtual 
equivalent, this would not have the same meaning as the 
tracking of the physical movement of an artefact.
Making a cache
Unlike many other location-based activities, participation in 
geocaching was not simply about the consumption of 
experiences designed by others. An equally significant way 
in which participants engaged with this activity was in the 
creation and publication of their own geocaches for others to 
consume. This side of the geocaching experience is 
relatively under explored compared with the consumption 
experiences. However, our research indicates that for many 
participants, the creation of these caches was an integral part 
of their experience of geocaching. Making a cache was not 
something people did straight away when entering the 
hobby but typically took place after being involved for a 
period of time. Through doing caches of others, participants 
built up experience of what makes a good or interesting 
cache and acquired the confidence to create and publish 
their own. Making a cache was also more effortful than 
simply doing one and so required more commitment to the 
hobby. Only once participants established they wanted a 
longer term commitment to the activity did they begin to 
engage in creating of their own caches.
The motivations for creation were varied. One of the key 
reasons cited by participants was the desire to give 
something back to the community and hobby that had given 
them pleasure. In this sense it was an act of reciprocation, a 
social act that ensured a continued growth of the cache 
corpus by and for the community. The community therefore 
is very much self sustaining in a way that can be contrasted 
with those communities dependent on third party content 
such as certain other gaming communities.
A second motivation for creating a cache was the desire to 
share with others a place of significance or natural beauty 
(mirroring the earlier motivation for doing caches to find out 
about new places).
“There is one over in Wales by the side of a reservoir – the scenery 
is stunning - on a sunny day lake like today the scenery is so 
beautiful that people ought to know about this so I set this cache up 
over there. This reservoir is so beautiful that I thought well I’ve 
got to take people there.
There was great satisfaction to be had in the knowledge of 
helping others find these places that people would otherwise 
not know about. Reading logs of visitors expressing their 
appreciation was an important part of this experience since it 
makes visible the effects on others that the cache had.
“So Carolyn did quite a bit of research to see where she wanted to 
put it... She got a lot of compliments for that part of the cache. It’s 
gratifying to know you have helped others. Like you’ve 
experienced someone else’s cache has taken you to parts of the 
country that is nice. To then experience that someone else has had 
the same pleasant experience but doing one of your caches that’s 
nice.”
Of significance here is more than just the ability to inform 
others of the place. One could present this information in 
another forum such as, for example, a personal web site. 
But what making and publishing a cache did was provide 
creators with a socially meaningful and accountable way of 
“tagging” a place as being one of interest. When publishing 
a cache on the geocache.com web site, the cache web page 
includes contextual information about the cache. This 
provided an opportunity for cache creators to inform others. 
Some of this was used simply to provide historical or 
geographical context about the place but it also created an 
opportunity for the creators to express some more personal 
information about the place of personal significance to them. 
For example, “this is the place we first met”, or “the bench 
you see is where we used to sit when we were courting”. In 
another example, a participant used this as an opportunity to 
dedicate a cache to his partner and her achievements in 
relation to the place where he had placed the cache.
“I felt proud of Pauline for walking up the hill because it was steep 
and I called it Pauline’s Peak. My partner Pauline suffers from a 
leg condition which means she has to walk with the aid of a stick. 
This is the highest hill she has ever walked up and therefore I have 
named this cache after her splendid achievement!”
Another motivation for making a cache was that it provided 
a mental challenge to the creator. Creating traditional 
caches was relatively straightforward, but the challenge of 
creating puzzle caches was particularly stimulating for the 
creators.
“I suppose also the mental challenge of creating it. I enjoy 
thinking up a new idea.”
Participants would spend a considerable amount of effort in 
creating these puzzles. Thinking up a new angle on a theme 
was important. But there was also effort in identifying a 
location that was both suitable as a hiding place, an 
interesting final destination, had features in the environment 
for use within the puzzle and also a specific location which 
had location coordinates that would work well within the 
framework of the puzzle idea they had set up. This puzzle 
construction would take place over the course of weeks or 
months and involved iterative in situ visits, research work at 
home and the creation of any necessary support materials. 
For some participants, this process was an ongoing activity, 
either through keeping a mental note of seed ideas and 
locations as they came across them or more formally 
keeping a notebook of ideas and relevant content for the 
construction of these puzzle caches
But the motivations here too were partly social in that much 
of it is about setting a mental challenge to others. The effort 
and mental challenge of creating the cache only made sense 
in the context of other people’s efforts to do it.
“It was a strange sensation - you have this split thing within you 
when you set a difficult one – half of you wants someone to find it
1184
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
to prove its doable and half of you doesn’t want somebody to find it 
–you want logs to come in saying this is an absolute so and so – 
what are those Winscombe Wanderers like? But you want a bit of 
both really.”
As we can see from the above quote, it was important that 
the puzzles are demonstrably doable by others as well as 
being challenging to others – this demonstration was only 
realised through the efforts of other cachers trying to solve 
the puzzle. Much of the feedback about this was played out 
in the logs and it was these responses by the community that 
generated pleasure (and on occasions disappointment – “It 
was a disappointment that they found it so quickly”) for the 
creator and played such an important role in motivating the 
creation of these caches.
“I try to think up new angles all the time – only so that people will 
go wow that was a good idea and you will go yes that’s cool – 
that’s probably why I put my own caches out. ”
“For a while Pam was doing just “Found it thanks” [a typical 
short response in the logs] – very short logs when she first found it. 
But now that she has set some of the own she is realising what 
pleasure you get from seeing other people’s logs... ‘Found it 
Thanks for the Cache’ is pretty boring – that’s not what the person 
who set it is looking for – they are looking for ‘Cor we suffered 
with this and we fell in the stream and here is a picture of us 
getting wet – it makes people seem real then.’
This social context within which these caches were put also 
led to another important consideration for cache creators, 
namely that of reputation. Several participants spoke of the 
importance of reputation and how you get known for the 
style and quality of the caches you create. Participation 
through creation of caches, (as in consuming the treasure 
hunts themselves), is an ongoing thing. The rewards and 
motivations are shaped through this social participation over 
time and is a concern that influenced the efforts people 
continued to put into creation (and ongoing maintenance) of 
their caches. There was always social accountability 
associated with creating and publishing these things.
As well as the motivators which drive creation behaviour 
there were also factors (over and above the creation effort) 
that limited it such that the number of caches created was 
typically orders of magnitude less then the number caches 
consumed by an individual. One such factor was the concern 
for ongoing maintenance of the cache. The practicalities of 
maintenance of different caches effectively created an upper 
limit on how many caches a person is prepared to create. 
But it also impacted on the positions where people put them. 
There was a need for relative convenience to ensure ongoing 
maintenance was practical. People tended to publish caches 
in places local to them for this reason or at least in places 
where they visited on a frequent and regular basis. As cache 
owners they do not want to be responsible for other’s 
frustrations of travelling to a location only to find the cache 
no longer exists or some elements not working effectively.
“The other one we have done is a multi cache but that is quite hard 
to maintain because we have hidden things in places which are the 
nest places to hide them. They keep rolling out or get lost in the 
mud or eaten by squirrels or... they are micros to find the first set 
of coordinates which lead to a traditional cache. We haven’t had 
trouble with the traditional one, it’s the micros that go missing and
then you feel bad when a family has gone out for the day and they 
haven’t actually found the cache because one of the micros has 
been eaten by a squirrel – so you have to go out and fix it pretty 
quickly.”
DISCUSSION
Through the study presented in this paper we have taken a 
look at geocaching as an everyday practice, highlighting the 
social motivations and behaviours accompanying it. In 
contrast to previous work in the area, the study has taken a 
more holistic view of the activity that has highlighted 
interestingly new characteristics of the activity and what it 
enables from a social perspective. This understanding of 
geocaching as everyday practice is of interest not just itself 
but also provides some useful new perspectives for thinking 
about location-based and geo-enabled experiences more 
generally. We reflect on some of those here.
First, while geocaching is defined in terms of the treasure 
hunt and the find, this is actually the end point in a much 
larger part of the consumption experience. For many 
people, geocaching was an opportunity for social occasion, 
a walk with family or friends. There are several features of 
geocaching that facilitated this. First, it provided purpose 
and motivation to a walk that was important in getting 
people involved in the social activity – in particular younger 
children. Second, the technology aspect of the location- 
based experience was actually backgrounded for large parts 
of the social occasion being brought out intermittently when 
necessary. In this sense it neither dominated nor hindered 
the possibilities for social interaction. Finally, it supported 
differentiated participation by different members of a social 
group. Not everyone needed the key technology to take part 
in the group activity. And members of a social group could 
participate as much or as little as possible in the location- 
based aspect of the geocaching experience while still being 
part of the group (e.g. just going for a walk with the group).
A second thing the research has shown is the significance of 
considering it as an ongoing practice that builds up over 
time. In understanding geocaching and other similar 
location-based experiences, it is overly simplistic to look for 
explanations of behaviour just within the characteristics of 
an individual discrete experience. In geocaching practices, 
much of the meaning, motivation and behaviour associated 
with it was shaped as much by what a geocacher has 
achieved to date (in terms of caches completed, travel bugs 
accessed etc) as it was by the characteristics of the next 
cache. One cannot understand the impulses and urges to get 
out and do another cache without considering it as an 
ongoing achievement. This is an important perspective for 
thinking about other location-based experiences.
A third issue concerns the creation and consumption. For 
many geocachers, both these aspects of the activity were a 
significant part of the experience, though there was an 
asymmetry in terms of effort involved and experience 
required. Creating the experience for someone else is more 
demanding in terms of time and mental effort than 
consuming those experiences created by others. While 
allowing other people to create location-based experiences 
or annotate space is not new per se, there has not been any
1185
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
real systematic study of the motivations and factors that 
influence it as an everyday practice as we have seen in this 
study. The study has highlighted some of these motivations. 
It has also shown how a dedicated forum for “publishing” 
these creations can be an important influence on behaviour. 
A good example of this is how placing caches in this forum 
provided a socially accountable way for a person to tag a 
place as important to them.
This begins to point to another important issue in 
understanding geocaching practices, namely the relationship 
between on-line and in situ behaviours. What the study has 
demonstrated is that such practices are intimately bound up 
together and that on-line participation can be a significant 
influence on associated location-based experiences and vice 
versa. There are number of issues to note here. First and 
perhaps most significant, is how the on-line technology and 
community it supports provide a social context within which 
these activities take place which motivate and shape 
ongoing participation. For example: the log responses to 
caches can motivate creation of caches; the friendly rivalry 
between participants can create an urgency to get out there; 
the social accountability of moving travel bugs on creates 
further urgency to get out there. All of these things and 
others emerge from the social context of these location- 
based activities provided by the on-line communities. This 
is a worthy consideration for designers of other location- 
based experiences. The on-line aspects of the experience 
also provide participants with what we might call in between 
participation. That is it provides more convenient touch 
points into the activity in between the in situ experiences 
that maintain a person’s participation even when not 
possible to get out to so the in situ parts of the experiences.
Geocaching is also significant in demonstrating an 
interesting alternative perspective on location-based and 
context aware activities. In some traditional views of 
location and context aware computing, the idea is that the 
technology simply responds to wherever you are. In this 
sense there is a fundamental notion of opportunism 
associated with the technology. But what is demonstrated in 
geocaching is that people are also planful about location- 
based experiences, planning to go somewhere because there 
is a location-based experience there. This is an important 
distinction from a design perspective because it emphasises 
the need to consider not just the location-based experience 
itself but also how to support the particular practices 
associated with planning to go to these places. Some good 
geocaching specific examples of this were visualisation 
tools to help people see the location of visual clusters of 
caches and also the context pages for each cache on the web 
site that encourage people to go in the first place.
In sum, the study has shown the importance of looking 
beyond the simple in situ consumption of a “treasure hunt”. 
Rather it is important to consider it as an ongoing practice 
that acquires social significance through its positioning 
within an on-line community. In addition, it is important to 
consider creation activities as well as consumption. We 
hope this perspective provides more general insight into the 
understanding and design of location-based experiences.
REFERENCES
1. Brown, B., MacColl, I., Chalmers, M., Galani, A., Randell, C. 
and Steed, A. (2003) Lessons from the Lighthouse: 
Collaboration in a shared mixed reality system. In 
Proceedings of CHI ’03, Ft Lauderdale, USA.
2. Benford, S., Crabtree, A. Flintham, M. Drozd, A., Anastasi, 
R., Paxton, M. Tandavanitj, N., Adams, M. and Row-Farr, J. 
(2006) Can You See Me Now? In Proceedings of CHI ’06, 
Montreal, Canada.
3. Chavez, D.J., Courtright, R., and Schneider, I. (2004) Over 
the river and through the woods. Parks & Recreation, 39 (4), 
68-72.
4. Chavez, D.J., Schneider, I., and Powell, T. (2004). The social- 
psychology of a technology driven outdoor trend: Geocaching 
in the USA. In Proceedings of HICSS, 2004, Honolulu, HI.
5. Harper, R., Regan, T., and Rouncefield, M. (2006) Taking 
Hold of TV: Learning from the Literature. In Proceedings of 
OzCHI, Sydney, Australia,
6. http://www.createascape.org.uk
7. http://www.geocaching.com
8. http://www.mscapers.com
9. http://www.mobilebristol.com
10. http://www.yellowarrow.org
11. Hull, R., Clayton, B., Melamed, T. (2004) Rapid Authoring of 
Mediascapes. In Proceedings of UbiComp 2004, Nottingham, 
UK.
12. Hurd, A. R., & Schlatter, B. E. (2005). Geocaching: 21st 
century hide-and-seek. The Journal of Physical Education, 
Recreation, and Dance, 76(7).
13. Kelley, M.A. (2006) Local Treasures: Geocaching across 
America. Santa Fe: Center for American Places.
14. Lane, G. (2003) Urban Tapestries: public authoring and social 
knowledge. In Proceedings of 1AD Conference on Appliance 
Design, Bristol, UK.
15. McIntosh, W. D. & Schmeichel, B. (2004) Collectors and 
Collecting: A Social Psychological Perspective. Leisure 
Sciences 26: 85-97.
16. McGonical, J. (2007) Why I Love Bees: A Case Study in 
Collective Intelligence Gaming. 
http://www.avantgame.com/writings.htm
17. McNamara, J. (2004) Geocaching for Dummies. John Wiley 
and Sons.
18. O'Hara, K., Kindberg, T., Glancy, M., Baptista, L. 
Sukumaran, B., Kahana, Gil. Rowbotham, J. (2007) Social 
Practices in Location-Based Collecting. In Proceedings of 
CHI '07, San Jose, CA, USA
19. O'Hara, K., Slayden Mitchell, A. and Vorbau, A. (2007) 
Consuming Video on Mobile Devices. In Proceedings of CHI 
'07, San Jose, USA.
20. Palen, L., Salzman, M. and Youngs, E. (2000) Going wireless: 
behavior & practice of new mobile phone users. In 
Proceedings of CSCW ’00, Philadelphia, USA.
21. Peters, J. (2004). The Complete Idiot's Guide to Geocaching. 
New York: Alpha Books.
22. Shermann, E. (2004) Geocaching: Hike and Seek with Your 
GPS. Apress.
23. Williams, M., Fleuriot, C., Reid, J., Hull, R., Facer, K. and 
Jones, O. (2002) Mobile Bristol: A New Sense Of Place. In: 
Proceedings of UbiComp 2002, Goteborg, Sweden.
24. Wright, T. (2003) Geocaching: Trees as treasure. In American 
Forests; 109, 2, p.7-9
1186
