# Para 0 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 1 1
Performing Thrill: Designing Telemetry Systems
# Para 2 1
and Spectator Interfaces for Amusement Rides
# Para 3 2
Holger Schnädelbach 1, Stefan Rennick Egglestone 1, Stuart Reeves 1,
Steve Benford 1, Brendan Walker 2 and Michael Wright 1
# Para 5 1
1 Mixed Reality Laboratory	2 Aerial
# Para 6 1
University of Nottingham	42 Murchison Road
# Para 7 1
Computer Science	London
# Para 8 1
Wollaton Road, Nottingham, NG8 11313, UK	E10 6NB, UK
# Para 9 1
{hms,sre,str,sdb,maw}@cs.nott.ac.uk	info@aerial.fm
# Para 10 1
ABSTRACT
# Para 11 20
Fairground: Thrill Laboratory was a series of live events 
that augmented the experience of amusement rides. A 
wearable telemetry system captured video, audio, heart-rate 
and acceleration data, streaming them live to spectator 
interfaces and a watching audience. In this paper, we 
present a study of this event, which draws on video 
recordings and post-event interviews, and which highlights 
the experiences of riders, spectators and ride operators. Our 
study shows how the telemetry system transformed riders 
into performers, spectators into an audience, and how the 
role of ride operator began to include aspects of 
orchestration, with the relationship between all three roles 
also transformed. Critically, the introduction of a telemetry 
system seems to have had the potential to re-connect 
riders/performers back to operators/orchestrators and 
spectators/audience, re-introducing a closer relationship that 
used to be available with smaller rides. Introducing 
telemetry to a real-world situation also creates significant 
complexity, which we illustrate by focussing on a moment 
of perceived crisis.
# Para 31 1
Author Keywords
# Para 32 3
Performance, theme-park, amusement, fairground, 
telemetry, biosensing, spectator interface, wearable 
computing, heart rate, orchestration.
# Para 35 1
ACM Classification Keywords
# Para 36 2
H1.2 User/Machine Systems; H5. Information Interfaces 
and Presentation.
# Para 38 1
INTRODUCTION
# Para 39 3
The amusement park, spanning the theme park and the 
fairground, is an historic form of entertainment that has 
driven the development of entertainment technologies for
# Para 42 6
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
# Para 48 1
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
# Para 49 1
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
# Para 50 7
many years, from the first manually operated roundabouts 
or ‘dobbies’, to today’s virtual reality simulations and 
extreme roller coasters [15]. Computers are now routinely 
used to design amusement rides, control their operation 
[18], enable a rider’s interaction and immersion [12], and 
increasingly to document their experience by automatically 
producing still images or even videos as souvenirs.
# Para 57 16
One of the most challenging problems facing modern 
amusement parks today is that of spectators: accompanying 
visitors, often the adults in a party, who are unable or 
unwilling to go on the rides, but who nevertheless have to 
spend a day at the park. These visitors are often left 
‘holding the bags’. Given that they are often also the ones 
who hold the purse strings, it is important to consider how 
their experience might be improved. Inspired in part by the 
increasing use of telemetry in sports such as motor racing 
[5], our approach to this problem is to use a personal 
wearable telemetry system to capture a rider’s experience 
and broadcast it to spectators so that they can get a greater 
sense of what it might be like to ride and can more closely 
share in the reactions of friends and family. Such a system 
also has the potential to extend the images (and in some 
places videos) that are now being sold as ride souvenirs.
# Para 73 14
HCI research has also begun to focus on the spectator. As 
interfaces have moved into public settings such as 
museums, galleries, clubs, performances and the city 
streets, it has become increasingly important to consider 
how interaction with computers operates as a public affair. 
Inspired by ethnographic studies of interaction in such 
settings [6,7,8,16], researchers have proposed new 
approaches to designing interaction with spectators in mind, 
for example choosing to reveal or hide the manipulations of 
an interface and their consequent effects [13], or by 
considering how to frame interaction in the public arena [2]. 
This paper reports on a deliberate attempt to create such a 
spectator interface and our study is therefore relevant to this 
emerging discussion in HCI as we address later on.
# Para 87 4
Our approach has involved the rapid development and 
public deployment of a wearable telemetry system along 
with a qualitative study – involving video recordings and 
follow up interviews – in which we have developed an
# Para 91 1
1167
# Para 92 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 93 7
understanding of how this technology is understood by the 
public. As a first prototype we staged a sequence of live 
experiments which played a principal role in a series of 
major science museum events based around the study of 
amusement rides. We therefore begin by describing this 
performance event and our telemetry system before turning 
to our study.
# Para 100 22
OVERVIEW OF FAIRGROUND: THRILL LABORATORY 
Our study is of an event called Fairground: Thrill Laboratory, 
henceforth referred to as F:TL. This was a series of six 
theatrical events that were staged at the Dana Centre (Science 
Museum, London) in three weeks of autumn 2006. Full 
technical details of the design of the events and technology 
can be found in [17], as these are only briefly summarised in 
this paper. The events were designed to explore the nature of 
thrill through a combination of science and entertainment, 
involving talks by experts (for example, in biometrics and 
theme park ride engineering), live telemetry streamed from a 
selection of theme park rides, and the opportunity to go on 
the ride at the end of the evening. After a set of introductory 
talks, the audience was presented with a visualisation of live 
telemetry streamed directly from the ride. Firstly a member 
of the production team rode, providing a live commentary of 
his experience. Secondly, a lottery was used to select an 
audience member whose telemetry would be transmitted 
next. During the final stage of F:TL, all other audience 
members were free to ride, with volunteers using the 
telemetry equipment as often as the technical and 
organisational infrastructure could support.
# Para 122 4
rotating arm can be controlled, with riders experiencing 
accelerations reaching up to 4G. We have chosen this ride 
because the event structure and technology were at their most 
stable and well developed at this point.
# Para 126 9
A custom-built wearable telemetry system captured four 
sources of data from riders: video of their face, audio as a 
means of self-reporting, ECG and acceleration. This 
equipment was integrated into a jacket as shown in Figure 3. 
This had to meet several design challenges, including fitting 
the passenger restraint system of each of the rides, being 
comfortable to wear and remaining easily serviceable. The 
design also had to address the physical strain of wearing 
head-mounted equipment at high G-forces.
# Para 135 1
Figure 3 Wearable telemetry technology
# Para 136 6
The audience experience of the telemetry data was supported 
by the ‘expert’ visualisation, shown in Figure 4, projected in 
the main auditorium. Other, less detailed visualisations were 
projected into the bar and onto the side of an opposing 
building as ambient display for the benefit of any participants 
who were in a position to observe these locations.
# Para 142 1
Microphone
# Para 143 1
Aerials
# Para 144 1
Jacket
# Para 145 1
Camera
# Para 146 3
ECG 
Acceleration 
Heart rate
# Para 149 1
Live video
# Para 150 1
Figure 1 Booster Figure 2 Rider position
# Para 151 10
Each week featured a different amusement ride that was set 
up outside so that it was visible from the various spaces used 
within the venue. Here we draw on the experience 
surrounding the last and most extreme of the three, the 
Booster, a pure white-knuckle ride that relies mainly upon 
fear and on extreme accelerations to elicit a sense of thrill in 
the rider. It features a central tower supporting a 40m-long 
rotating arm, similar to a windmill. Freely rotating carriages 
are attached at either end of the arm and hold two pairs of 
riders seated back-to-back. The speed and direction of the
# Para 161 1
Figure 4 Visualisation of telemetry data
# Para 162 4
This visualisation included the ECG and heart rate trails, 
numerical heart rate data, a 3D visualisation of the G forces 
experienced by the rider and live video from the helmet 
camera in addition to the audio stream broadcast over
# Para 166 1
1168
# Para 167 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 168 3
speakers. During transmission, experts were at hand who 
introduced the data to help the audience make sense of it 
and ‘calibrate’ their expectations.
# Para 171 1
EXPERIENCING THRILL
# Para 172 26
To explore the impact of introducing wearable telemetry 
technology on riders, spectators and ride operators, we 
concentrate on three vignettes drawn from a larger corpus 
of data. This data consists of: eighteen sets of telemetry 
data including video recordings captured by helmet 
mounted cameras worn by the riders, along with 
corresponding log files of accelerometer and heart rate data 
captured for each; approximately fifteen hours of video 
recordings by a handheld camera following participants and 
team members; and supporting design documents and notes. 
These vignettes have emerged from an analysis process 
which involved the transcription and discussion of multiple 
fragments in a series of ‘data sessions’, during which our 
key themes emerged. These themes were also followed-up 
through five semi-structured phone interviews with riders. 
Two further semi-structured interviews with ride operators 
at the events were also conducted. Ultimately, we selected 
these three vignettes as being representative of the most 
compelling issues that we uncovered. Some appreciation of 
the spatial and organisational set-up of spectators, operators 
and riders and their lines of communication is critical for 
understanding the vignettes. The following therefore 
provides a brief overview. Overall the event was staged 
across multiple spaces inside and outside the venue, while we 
concentrate here on those spaces that are directly necessary 
for our discussion.
# Para 198 9
The main auditorium (2nd floor). Here, data transmitted 
from a single rider sitting on the ride outside was visualised 
and discussed. This process was guided by a number of event 
hosts, who ensured that each group of roughly 90 spectators 
had good access to this information. In addition, the main 
telemetry control room was set up on one side in the same 
space, physically overlooking the ride outside. From here, 
technical operators ensured the availability of the live data 
streams at the right times during the event.
# Para 207 8
On the ride. On the ride, set up outside approximately 40m 
away from the auditorium, riders went through the roughly 
two minute long ride program. As part of the telemetry 
equipment, the rider had a one-way audio link to the control 
room, which was sometimes (but not always) broadcast to 
the audience in the auditorium. This audio stream was 
controlled by event staff, who responded to requests from 
event hosts.
# Para 215 7
Outside in front of the ride (ground floor). From here, the 
ride operator controlled the speed, direction and duration of 
the ride, as instructed by a telemetry operator, who was in 
two-way radio contact with the control room upstairs. At the 
right times during the event, the telemetry data, operation of 
the ride and verbal commentary by the rider were 
coordinated via this link.
# Para 222 11
The following three vignettes, taken from the final event, 
highlight the experiences of different kinds of participant in 
the event. The first follows a ‘professional rider’, a member 
of the production team who gave an initial public 
demonstration at the start of the event. The second follows 
the relatively routine experience of Sam, a member of the 
public audience who became a rider by virtue of winning 
the ticket-lottery. In contrast, the third focuses on the 
activities of the technical operators as they decide how to 
deal with a moment of crisis in which a public rider appears 
to be in difficulty.
# Para 233 1
Vignette 1: Alan – the professional rider
# Para 234 12
Our opening sequence begins with Alan&apos;, our professional 
rider, waiting on the ride outside having already been 
presented to the audience downstairs. The audience is 
getting seated in the main auditorium. Two of the operators 
are outside on the main platform of the Booster ride. Two 
more operators are in the control area in the auditorium and 
are in radio contact with one of the operators on the ground. 
As the audience settles, a host at the front of the room 
provides a very brief introduction for the audience, 
introducing Trevor, an expert in the sensing technology 
whose role it is to explain its operation and the nature of the 
visualisations.
# Para 246 6
{1} Host: Come and sit down. Mentally fasten your 
seatbelts [ ... ] we’re gonna go straight to Trevor 
[gestures towards main projection, which at this point 
switches to the visualisation]. Telemetry, what is it? 
[Faces Trevor who	enters]	Trevor.	[Host
claps][Audience claps]
# Para 252 2
Once standing by the projection, Trevor goes on to describe 
the individual components of the visualization.
# Para 254 9
{2} Trevor: [ ... ] On the ECG [pointing at the ECG display 
again] we see the peak [flattens hand and raises 
further into air] when the heart is beat, we analyse it 
and calculate [points at heart rate display at bottom] 
the heart rate. We see Alan is still... [moves hand 
horizontally] sitting there and waiting so his heart 
rate is not big [inaudible] 70 or [inaudible] we see it 
changes all the time [waves left hand along the heart 
rate line] it’s very variable. [ ... ]
# Para 263 6
Trevor’s conduct at the projection highlights how variable 
the visualisation is and thus how to make sense of and 
‘read’ what is a ‘reasonable’ or ‘expected’ level of 
variability in heart rate, ECG and so on. As his description 
comes to a close, Brian, another host, who is at the back of 
the room begins speaking.
# Para 269 5
{3} Brian: I think... we’ll see we’ll umm I’ll cut to Alan 
now and see what he’s got to say just before we 
started the ride. [Beeping radio sound, Brian talks 
into radio] Right Tim could you get Alan to start 
speaking please?
# Para 274 2
Alan is silent for approximately three seconds during which 
time the ride starts moving relatively slowly.
# Para 276 1
&apos; All names have been changed for anonymity
# Para 277 1
1169
# Para 278 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 279 7
{4} Alan: Uhh okay I’m assuming you can hear me. And 
it’s pretty cold out here [audience laughs]. [ ... ] it’s 
going to be an interesting ride. And [inaudible] get 
spun around and it’s actually quite a pleasant 
sensation. The view up here is phenomenal. And the 
ground comes rushing towards you pretty quickly 
here I’m not really going fast yet so...
# Para 286 10
It is notable that Alan mentions the ride’s slowness. The 
ride was, in fact, intentionally run slowly at the beginning 
as experience had shown that this increased the reliability 
of wireless communications, providing stability during the 
moments when Brian ‘hands over’ to Alan. As a 
professional rider, Alan has already been on the ride many 
times, but each time he must describe his experience anew. 
Although he can talk to his audience he cannot see or hear 
them in return and so must broadcast himself to unseen-but-
assumed audience.
# Para 296 3
Alan now continues his reportage. However, as the ride 
speeds up so his talk begins to feature more exclamation 
than description.
# Para 299 2
{5} Alan: And I’ve started to rotate oh here it goes and 
I’m upside-down ooohh! [Audience laughs]
# Para 301 2
Brian: Brian to Tim [an operator outside] can you go 
faster please?
# Para 303 1
[Audience laugh]
# Para 304 1
Alan: The ground’s [inaudible] very quickly!
# Para 305 1
[Audience laugh]
# Para 306 5
Although it is in the planned schedule of events that the ride 
will indeed speed up after a short period, Brian theatrically 
highlights this moment to the audience. Brian’s statement 
transforms what might normally be a private coordination 
between the crew into a public one.
# Para 311 4
At this point there is sudden silence as the video freezes and 
audio drops out. The audience laughs and starts talking 
amongst itself, with some audience members at the back 
looking out the small windows to the ride itself.
# Para 315 1
{6} Host: Have we lost him?
# Para 316 3
Brian: Are we... I think we’ve lost Alan [laughs] 
[Video resumes and Alan can be heard laughing] 
Host: No he’s back
# Para 319 1
Brian: Oh no he’s back
# Para 320 1
[Audience laugh]
# Para 321 1
Alan: Wohoo!
# Para 322 1
[Video and audio freeze again]
# Para 323 1
Brian: Ooh...
# Para 324 8
Brian and the host comment on what is observable to the 
audience, such as “losing” Alan (i.e., the audiovisual stream 
freezing), getting him “back” (i.e., resumption of the 
audiovisual stream) and finally “losing” him yet again. It is 
part of the performative work of Brian and the Host to 
weave Alan’s broadcast into the ongoing trajectory of the 
performance, highlighting his comments, covering during 
disconnections, and fading him in and out as necessary.
# Para 332 3
{7} Brian: Okay I’ll get him off the ride now I think he’s 
had enough. Okay can we let err let Alan off please? 
[Video and audio begin to work again]
# Para 335 1
Alan: I can’t really talk [fades out]
# Para 336 6
As we saw earlier, Alan’s more sober description became 
more interspersed with laughter and exclamation. Here 
Alan states as he is faded out that he is finding it difficult to 
talk. Even though Alan is a ‘professional rider,’ there are 
times when he may ‘lose control’ to some extent due to the 
extreme physical nature of the experience.
# Para 342 4
Finally, Trevor returns to briefly describe Alan’s heart rate, 
explaining that he can “start to relax now”, highlighting the 
decrease with his hand once again. Brian then closes the 
performance.
# Para 346 2
{8} Brian: Brilliant that was Alan on the Booster! [Claps] 
[Audience claps]
# Para 348 1
Vignette 2: Sam – the public lottery winner
# Para 349 12
In our second vignette, a member of the public, Sam, has 
won an opportunity to ride the Booster in the public lottery. 
Her friend Anne joins her for the ride. Sam has been guided 
downstairs and towards the lawn in front of the ride in order 
to put on the necessary equipment (see Figure 1, bottom). 
Also present are operators H, J (filming), and operator F, 
who in this case is female so as to avoid potential 
embarrassment when fitting sensors to Sam’s torso. 
Standing near the ride, and after a short moment of 
discussion about the cold and “nerves”, Sam begins to don 
the equipment, the first element of which is the heart 
monitor.
# Para 361 3
{9} Operator F: We need we need to attach these 
[holding up patch] here and here on your skin so I’ll 
do that over here
# Para 364 5
At this point Sam and operator F, who step away from the 
main group, creating a more private area in which Sam is 
facing away from the group as the sensors are placed on her 
torso. The setup procedure continues as operator H now 
helps Sam into the jacket and helmet.
# Para 369 5
{10} Operator H [Moves around to the side of Sam, holding 
the helmet’s camera]: Is that relatively even? Does 
that fit? [Operator H moves round the back again] 
Sam: Yeah yeah it’s a bit it’s a bit loose [moves 
helmet around with hands]
# Para 374 1
[ ... ]
# Para 375 2
Operator H [moving round to side of Sam again]: 
We’ll [inaudible] the strap as well
# Para 377 1
Sam: OK that’d be good
# Para 378 1
[ ... ]
# Para 379 3
Operator H: Now we need to attach these to the 
sensors [to Operator F] you put those just here 
[places palms on side of his torso]
# Para 382 1
[ ... ]
# Para 383 2
Operator H: [Stands up straight now, steps back from 
the jacket] Now let me see we’ve got everything
# Para 385 2
As the first part of the donning procedure comes to a close, 
operator H physically steps back to appraise the situation.
# Para 387 1
1170
# Para 388 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 389 8
The equipment must be ‘just right’ in preparedness for the 
ready signal, as well as being relatively comfortable for the 
rider. This takes a significant amount of time and operator 
H has at this point already spent several minutes getting to 
point at which it is possible perform the next task. This 
second phase of readying involves testing the various 
functions of the equipment. This takes a further few 
minutes.
# Para 397 8
{11} Operator H: [Walks back away from Sam and guides 
her into a position] Could you stand here for a 
second, and just stand this way exactly that way [ ... ] 
Operator H: [Speaking into radio, oriented towards 
main building] Hello err we’ve got everything 
switched on are you getting data? [ ... ] You getting 
the video as well? Shall we test audio [...] [To Sam] 
So the err just count or something
# Para 405 3
{12} Sam: [Looking at Operator H] 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 I’m really 
scared at the moment I’m going to crap myself any 
minute now [ ... ]
# Para 408 1
Operator H: Just count again
# Para 409 1
Sam: Okay 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
# Para 410 2
[Sam continues counting several times whilst 
Operator H talks with upstairs]
# Para 412 2
Operator H: Confirmed ok that’s fine thanks [Turns 
towards Sam, nodding] S’alright
# Para 414 1
[Sam stops counting]
# Para 415 2
{13} Sam: Okay you’re going to make me talk and stuff oh 
brilliant oh dear
# Para 417 3
The equipment is now designated as working. Sam, 
operator H and the others must wait in readiness for the 
signal to start the ride.
# Para 420 3
{14} Operator H: [to Sam] We’ve got about 10 minutes but 
yesterday it varied by a lot so I hope it will just be 10 
minutes.
# Para 423 13
This sequence shows the considerable time and work 
required to get the rider and equipment to a state of 
readiness. The rider must stand at particular orientations so 
as to align aerials (“stand this way exactly”) for lengthy 
periods conducting tests in concert with operator H. After 
further waiting, the signal is given to operator H who then 
suggests they “go on” the ride. The group climbs the steps 
onto the base of the Booster, with Sam and Anne coming to 
be seated on the ride itself. As Sam is seated, operator H 
has to carefully remove the helmet, pass it through the 
bulky seat harness and reattach it once again. Trailing 
wires, battery levels and so on then have to be checked 
again. Sam and Anne wait for the ride to begin, chatting.
# Para 436 5
{15} Sam: It’s really cold isn’t it. Brrr. [ ... ] Is this all part 
of the thing to like proper heighten our senses or 
something so we’re really screwed up before we go on 
it? Do you offer post-traumatic stress counselling 
sessions?
# Para 441 5
We can contrast Sam’s experience with that of a normal 
rider. There are a number of practicalities which impact her: 
there is considerable waiting to be done, both on and off the 
ride; she feels the cold (in this instance); she must spend 
time donning and getting comfortable in the equipment, and
# Para 446 5
taking part in testing it. The build-up to the ride here is 
greater and longer than usual, and is clearly seen by Sam as 
heightening her anticipation. We also note how the audio 
testing reinforces the idea that she is meant to commentate 
on her experience.
# Para 451 4
Finally the signal is given that the presentations upstairs 
have come to a close and that the audience is ready. Sam 
begins talking as the ride’s steps retract, with the ground 
staff present on the lawn watching.
# Para 455 12
{16} Sam: Umm helloo um I’m sitting on the ride slightly 
scared but um really really excited so it should be 
cool. If I die, I love you all. [ ... ] Shall I just keep 
talking? Oh. The ride’s about to start! Ok we’re 
currently going up oh this is so cool! [ ... ] We’re kinda 
hanging forwards and um we’re coming down to the 
ground we’re going quite slow at the moment. I’m 
absolutely fine at the moment. Okay yeah they’re 
speeding up a bit now, this is absolutely brilliant. Um 
yeah quite high. Oooh! [high scream] Okay that was 
cool. Oh my good [...] Wow! [screams] Woohoo! 
Woohoo! Waa
# Para 467 1
[Video cuts out]
# Para 468 11
Sam: [shouting] Oh my gosh! This is so cool. Oh 
wow. This is the most amazing [inaudible] ever. 
[screams] woohoo woohoo! wooooooh! Oh wow this is 
fantastic mate. Ah you gotta come on this absolutely 
brilliant. Woo hoo! You alright Anne? Woo hoo hoo! 
This is absolutely wicked! Oh this is so good! ha ha ha 
woo hoo! I was afraid of heights not any more! Get 
in! [inaudible] Oh wow woo so far from the ground it’s 
wicked! [ ... ] Okay we’re coming to a stop now. Like 
that one, yeah, you should give it a go. Woo! Can we 
go again?
# Para 479 8
After the ride comes to a stop, Sam and Anne are helped off 
by operator H. Like Alan in the previous vignette, Sam is 
broadcasting to the unseen-but-assumed audience. Similarly 
to Alan she also begins by providing a running-commentary 
of her experience until she breaks into less controlled 
screaming and exclaiming as the ride speeds up. After this, 
when the ride has slowed down somewhat, she encourages 
the audience to have a go on the ride.
# Para 487 1
Vignette 3: Crisis in the control room
# Para 488 7
In our final vignette, we turn our focus to the control area in 
the main auditorium, during a time after both Alan and Sam 
have been on the Booster. The audience are now on the lawn 
in front of the ride, either queuing, on the ride itself, or 
spectating. Also on the lawn is operator H, helping a (female) 
rider who has volunteered herself from the queue to don the 
equipment. Operators A, S, T and J are in the control area.
# Para 495 1
{17} Operator S: Yeah I can hear audio
# Para 496 2
Operator A: We have err audio. Do we have ECG and 
accelerometer?
# Para 498 1
Operator S: No not yet
# Para 499 2
Operator A: Not even accelerometer cos I don’t think 
he turned that off
# Para 501 1
[ ... ]
# Para 502 1
Operator H: Hello there what’s the reception like?
# Para 503 1
[ ... ]
# Para 504 1
1171
# Para 505 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 506 1
Operator A: Yeah the video’s working fine and audio
# Para 507 2
Operator H: Okay so can we go on the next ride 
yeah?
# Para 509 3
Operator A: Having having said that video has just 
closed but I think once you oh it’s back again... I 
think once you go on the ride it’ll be okay
# Para 512 1
Operator H: Okay
# Para 513 3
Operator J: I think there’s somebody somebody 
standing in front of her so probably she’s blocking the 
transmission
# Para 516 6
This sequence exhibits the counterpart perspective to 
operator H’s work in the previous vignette. Here we see the 
extensive work of the crew upstairs in getting the ECG, 
accelerometer and audiovisual streams functioning to such 
a degree that they are in a ‘rideable’ state. This includes 
reasoning about the causes of wireless drop outs.
# Para 522 12
Now that the system is in a readied state and the last ride 
has come to a stop, the rider and her co-rider are taken by 
Operator H to the front of the queue, where they walk onto 
the Booster platform together. Like Sam, operator H helps 
the rider into the seat and checks the equipment for trailing 
wires and so on. With the bottom carriage loaded, the ride 
operator spins the ride halfway round so that our rider and 
her colleague are waiting at the top while the next carriage 
is loaded. It is at this point that the rider attempts to contact 
the ground. In fact, her audio is not generally audible but is 
channelled into some headphones which operator S has in 
his hands. However, she probably does not know this.
# Para 534 2
{18} Rider: Scuse me can you hear me? 
Operator S She’s saying can we hear her
# Para 536 2
Operator A [to Operator H]: She’s saying can we hear 
her... wave to her or something
# Para 538 1
Rider: Scuse me
# Para 539 2
{19} Operator H: Yeah I don’t [inaudible] forward. She 
sounded quite scared
# Para 541 1
Rider: Are you sure Ned? [Ned is sitting next to her]
# Para 542 2
Operator A: [laughs] Excellent that’s what we want to 
hear
# Para 544 1
Rider: Hello control?
# Para 545 2
Operator S: She thinks we can hear us 
Rider: Control please
# Para 547 2
{20}Operator A: Her heart rate’s gone down 
a bit now
# Para 549 2
Rider: Okay... control room can we please turn it off 
for Ned?
# Para 551 2
Operator A: I can’t quite see her eyes... but 
Rider: He’s really scared
# Para 553 2
Operator S: She said she’s really scared 
Rider: Please can you get the ride off?
# Para 555 2
Operator S: She said she’s really scared can we take 
her down
# Para 557 3
Operator A [to Operator H]: Apparently apparently 
the [inaudible] on the top says she’s really scared can 
we take her down
# Para 560 1
Operator H: Sorry? 
# Para 561 2
{21} Operator S: I think we should I think we should 
pretend we haven’t heard
# Para 563 1
Operator H: Sorry could you repeat
# Para 564 1
Operator T: Do you think it seriously or?
# Para 565 2
Operator A [to Operator H]: Apparently the girl on the 
top is really scared can we take her down
# Para 567 1
Rider: There’s nothing to be scared... hey
# Para 568 2
Operator A: How how how scared do you think she 
is... she’s not looking too...
# Para 570 2
Operator H: She really is saying that she wants 
down?
# Para 572 3
Rider: Hello control can you please hear me? 
[Operator A looks at Operator S, who has the 
headphones to one ear during this]
# Para 575 2
Operator S: S’yee yeah [takes headphones away from 
ear] she keeps saying ... can she come down
# Para 577 1
Rider: Hello pleeease
# Para 578 3
Operator A: She does keep saying that I mean we 
might [inaudible] actually so maybe bring her down if 
you can
# Para 581 1
Rider: Hellooo
# Para 582 2
As the ride actually begins properly, what is a critical 
moment for the technical crew arrives.
# Para 584 1
{22}Rider: Ned Ned close your eyes
# Para 585 3
Operator A: Yeah... How how’s she looking is she still 
Rider: Stop... stop please stop please stop noo 
Operator A [to Operator H]: She she keeps shouting
# Para 588 2
out stop... go go and see the ride operators 
[inaudible]
# Para 590 1
{23} Operator T: Why, it’s way to 160 her heart
# Para 591 17
At this point, operator H can be seen moving towards the 
booth in order to instruct the ride operator to slow or stop 
the ride. The main job of work for the crew in this episode, 
both on-the-ground and in the control area, is in 
determining the ‘seriousness’ of the situation, and then 
acting appropriately. Experiencing fear is a presumed 
possibility (if not expectation) with a ride like the Booster, 
and the technical crew must be sensitive to ‘normal’ or 
‘expected’ levels of fear versus ‘serious’ fear. As the 
situation progresses, a variety of methods come into play in 
determining the seriousness of the unfolding situation: 
Operator H observes: “she sounded quite scared&apos;; operator 
A considers her heart rate and facial expression (“how’s she 
looking&apos;); operator T explicitly introduces the issue of 
seriousness (“do you think it seriously or?&apos;); and finally 
operator S reflects on her persistence (“she keeps saying&apos;, 
“she keeps shouting out stop&apos;).
# Para 608 9
At this point we must stress a couple of points. Firstly, the 
rider’s companion reported being scared rather than the 
rider herself, and neither person was in any physical danger 
given that such rides are subject to strict safety checks and 
agreed operation procedures. Secondly, the operators in the 
control area were not in direct control of, nor directly 
responsible for, the ride’s operation, and this is a point upon 
which operator work in determining seriousness revolves. 
Initially the rider’s communication attempts are woven into
# Para 617 1
1172
# Para 618 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 619 11
a joke (“wave to her or something”), and the crew “pretend 
[they] haven’t heard”, relying on plausible deniability. This 
plausible deniability can only be sustained for so long, 
however, due to the determined level of seriousness, and as 
such the crew must begin to consider stopping the ride. This 
strategy, however, carries with it a number of significant 
overheads. Stopping the ride or slowing it down just for one 
person obviously disrupts the experience for co-riders and 
requires intervention by the operators. In the end, the ride is 
slowed down, but not stopped, which appears to resolve the 
crisis.
# Para 630 3
{24} Rider: Are you okay? Ned are you okay you okay you 
okay? Ned are you okay? Look look it’s [inaudible] 
no... it’s okay
# Para 633 3
Operator S: She she says it’s okay she says it’s okay 
Operator A: Oh sorry Operator H she says it’s okay 
now she says it’s okay
# Para 636 1
Operator H: It’s okay now?
# Para 637 1
Operator A: Yes yeah [inaudible]
# Para 638 1
DISCUSSION: PERFORMING AMUSEMENT RIDES
# Para 639 5
We now reflect on our three vignettes, further illustrating 
them with quotes from post-event interviews, in order to 
reveal the ways in which our telemetry system transforms 
riding into a public performance and also to identify key 
challenges for the development of future systems.
# Para 644 1
Previous research in performance interfaces
# Para 645 4
In order to ground this discussion and to enable us to draw 
out more general lessons for HCI, we relate our 
observations to previous accounts of interactive 
performances from the literature.
# Para 649 10
There is a longstanding interest in HCI in interaction in 
public settings such as museums, galleries, artistic 
performances and even the city streets. Ethnographic 
studies of interactives in museums and galleries have 
revealed the public nature of interactions and highlighted 
the roles of co-visitors and spectators [16]. Other studies of 
interactive performances have highlighted the importance 
of orchestration practices in shaping a live experience, 
including the ways in which technical crew monitor and 
intervene in an experience from behind the scenes [6, 8].
# Para 659 14
Studies such as these have inspired more general design 
frameworks for performance interfaces. In particular, [13] 
has discussed the relationship between the primary users of 
an interface, called performers, and nearby spectators, 
showing how different approaches to revealing or hiding 
performers’ manipulations of an interface and their 
consequent effects might lead to experiences that can be 
considered to be ‘expressive’, ‘secretive’, ‘magical’ or 
‘suspenseful’. A second framework has considered how a 
performance is framed, further dividing spectators into two 
categories, audience members who are inside the 
performance frame and therefore aware of the nature of the 
performance versus bystanders who remain outside the 
frame and so may be unwitting observers [2]. Drawing on
# Para 673 5
this existing body of work, we now consider how our F:TL 
performance can be described in terms of the relationships 
between the three roles of performer, spectator (who may 
be further subdivided into audience and bystanders) and 
orchestrator (spanning a diverse range of sub-roles).
# Para 678 13
Reconnecting performers, spectators and orchestrators 
In F:TL, the performers are the riders who wear the 
telemetry system, whereas the spectators are those who 
observe them. These spectators can indeed be divided into 
an audience who have purchased tickets for the event and 
who gather in the main auditorium to view the telemetry 
output, versus bystanders who may observe the ride outside 
but without seeing the telemetry. Finally, there is an 
extensive crew of orchestrators including the ride operator, 
the various technicians who manage the telemetry system, 
and the host and other ‘front of house’ staff. We now 
discuss how our telemetry system changes the nature of 
each role and perturbs the relationships between them.
# Para 691 12
From spectator to audience. As intended, our telemetry 
system transforms the experience of watching the ride, 
creating an audience who were observed to engage with the 
host and respond to events shown by the telemetry, for 
example by clapping and laughing (e.g., vignette fragments 
{1,2,5,8}). In post-event interviews, audience members 
reported enjoying riders’ audio and video commentaries as 
this conveyed “how they behave and how they react” but 
also the telemetry data as this gave a glimpse into “what’s 
happening within them”. They noted that the telemetry 
system offered a level of detail that was not available when 
directly observing the ride due to its scale and speed:
# Para 703 6
“when you’re near the ride and watching it, you can’t 
obviously see people’s reactions. ... You can only see that 
they’re screaming, but, as there are four people on each car, 
you don’t even know who’s screaming ... its just like there’s 
a screaming seat, four seats, coming past, and you don’t know 
who’s screaming.”
# Para 709 2
However, feedback also noted that the system could not 
replace the physicality of being next to the actual ride itself:
# Para 711 4
“There’s still the queue, there’s the noise of the engine going, 
of the machine, which I remember from the first one made 
this incredible kind of noise, it sounded quite interesting, 
there’s the queue, the lights ... the experience”
# Para 715 2
In short the telemetry system can enhance, but not replace, 
the experience of observing the ride.
# Para 717 9
From rider to performer. The introduction of the 
telemetry system radically transformed the experience of 
riding. There was a clear, almost universal, tendency for 
riders to consciously perform, commentating on their 
experience for the benefit of the watching audience 
{4,5,16}. This urge to perform may be a natural tendency or 
may have been learned from the initial demonstration by 
the professional rider. It may also be a way of reducing 
anxiety for some riders as noted by one interviewee:
# Para 726 1
1173
# Para 727 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 728 3
“I think in a way it made me feel more comfortable ... to be 
speaking to somebody all the time ... you have somebody 
accompany you rather than feeling the dread alone”.
# Para 731 3
It is interesting that they felt this way even though the 
communication was asymmetric, i.e., there was no 
reassuring direct feedback from the audience.
# Para 734 7
However, the most striking aspect of these performances 
was their bi-modal nature. Nearly everyone, including the 
seasoned professional, switched between providing a lucid 
commentary when the ride was moving slowly {4, 16} to 
displaying a distinct loss of control, shouting and screaming 
but being unable to commentate, at high intensity moments 
{6,16}). Interviewees commented on this:
# Para 741 2
“There were certain periods were I just couldn’t concentrate 
on anything else other than the ride, put it that way”.
# Para 743 2
Riders also reported losing their awareness of being 
recorded and observed during these intense moments:
# Para 745 2
“Maybe at the beginning I was controlling myself ... later on, 
everything was gone ... during the ride it all just faded away”.
# Para 747 3
This reflects previous accounts of how ‘pleasurable’ 
experiences can lead to a ‘flow state’ in which people 
experience an altered awareness of their surroundings [4].
# Para 750 12
An interesting design implication of this bi-modal structure 
is a potential requirement to create ride-programs (human 
or computer controlled) that provide opportunities for both 
modes. While most rides tend to begin slowly and then 
speed up, it may be beneficial to exaggerate this or even 
build slower moments into the middle of rides to offer 
opportunities for more lucid commentary. Interestingly, our 
wireless communications also seem to have been more 
reliable at slower speeds, with most drop outs occurring 
during fast movements {6}, and so the technology may also 
benefit from carefully designed programs, for example, if 
we wish to avoid long drop outs in the telemetry.
# Para 762 20
The process of donning the technology also affected the 
rider’s experience. We saw in sequences {9,10,11} that it 
took many minutes to don the system dealing with mundane 
but important details such as glasses, ponytails, the fit of the 
helmet and trailing wires. Such delays could heighten 
anticipation and anxiety as seen in {15}. Fitting the body 
worn sensors can also be invasive {9}, involving 
consideration of privacy and the gender of helpers. A 
further delay arose from the need to coordinate performers 
and audience, especially delaying the ride until the audience 
was in place, primed and warmed up for them {3,14}. 
Managing the coordination of performers and audience will 
be a significant challenge if telemetry systems are to be 
employed on a mass scale in high throughput situations 
such as theme parks. New mechanisms (e.g., involving 
mobile phones) may be required to coordinate individual 
riders with groups of family and friends who wish to 
observe them in particular. Of course, current rides already 
involve a degree of coordination between these two roles as 
family and friends may try to spot ‘their riders’ from a
# Para 782 3
viewing gallery. However, the introduction of our telemetry 
system raises the stakes if the point is for spectators to be 
able to observe particular riders.
# Para 785 13
From operator to orchestrator. F:TL also significantly 
extended the ride operator role to include a variety of 
additional tasks concerned with the deployment of the 
telemetry system such as fitting, testing and monitoring as 
well as the coordination of ride start, speed and acceleration 
with the rest of the event. Our data has also demonstrated 
that in an actual fairground setting, ride operation might 
additionally involve provision of the ‘professional rider’ 
and the interpretation of the telemetry data {2}. In F:TL 
these various orchestration functions of ride operation were 
spread across multiple people and spaces, requiring new 
communication and coordination practices and technologies 
{17} and resulting in a complex control scenario.
# Para 798 27
Overall, our telemetry system not only transforms each role, 
but also serves to connect them in new ways. Perhaps the 
most interesting perturbation introduced by our system was 
to more directly connect riders to the orchestration team, as 
shown in our third vignette in which a rider uses the 
telemetry system to try to persuade the team to stop the ride 
on behalf of another rider. This vignette also shows how the 
team use the telemetry system as a resource to help them 
decide how to proceed, drawing on audio, video and even 
the heart rate data in assessing the state of play {19,20,23}. 
It is interesting to reflect on this in light of the history of 
amusement rides. Traditional fairground rides were (and 
still are) on a much smaller physical scale than today’s 
extreme rides and so naturally afforded a close connection 
between riders, spectators and operators. For example, so- 
called ‘gaff lads’ (operators assistants) would ride the 
Waltzers, collecting money from ‘punters’ in the cars, 
showing off to the girls and giving some cars an extra spin 
depending on who was in them (see [11] for an account of 
showmanship and traditional fairgrounds). Modern theme 
park rides however have fractured this relationship due to 
their massive scale and also computer control. Perhaps 
telemetry systems such as ours can reconnect these 
fragmented roles and spaces, restoring an element of 
traditional showmanship? Indeed, one of our interviewees, 
an experienced showman, expressed an appreciation for the 
technology as being “back to the old school” in this regard.
# Para 825 1
Selective disconnection
# Para 826 7
This said, providing a universal open channel between 
performers, spectators and orchestrators may be going too 
far. Returning to the bi-modal nature of performance on an 
extreme ride such as the Booster, on watching their videos 
afterwards several interviewees were surprised by their loss 
of control during intense moments and noted some potential 
for embarrassment, for example:
# Para 833 2
“I was kind of slightly um worried that I would have done 
something stupid”
# Para 835 1
1174
# Para 836 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 837 3
“I was doing things that I was not aware of. I was swearing, 
for example, and um ... I did it unconsciously, I don’t 
remember doing it, you know”.
# Para 840 21
A similar issue can be seen in our third vignette in which a 
rider pleads for the ride to be stopped over what is 
potentially a public channel. People are often scared on 
amusement rides (after all, this is part of the point of the 
experience to a degree) and may want the ride to stop. 
While operators do of course monitor for critical incidents 
and could stop the ride if necessary, the lack of a clear 
backchannel from riders gives them the latitude to choose 
not to so do if they judge based on their experience that the 
situation is normal, for example that a rider is ‘routinely’ 
scared and will probably soon improve, or that stopping or 
slowing the ride would make matters worse (as this could 
be a long process), would destroy the experience for others, 
or might ultimately embarrass the individual more through 
the public humiliation of being removed from the ride. In 
other words, there is a degree of ambiguity in the traditional 
set-up that allows operators to choose ‘not to see’ scared 
riders if they feel this would be beneficial. This is 
reminiscent of Aoki and Woodruff’s discussion of the 
potentially useful role of ambiguity in ‘saving face’ in 
personal communications when using mobile phones [1].
# Para 861 14
Our telemetry system however, closes down this ambiguity, 
as riders are now aware that operators should be hearing 
them and may be more inclined to feel that they are being 
ignored. The situation is further complicated by the 
presence of spectators who may also be party to the rider’s 
requests over a public channel (perhaps luckily in vignette 3 
they were not as the public telemetry display did not 
broadcast audio during the later stages of the event). This 
has the potential to further embarrass riders, to make it even 
more difficult for operators to exercise their judgement, 
potentially facing a severe ethical dilemma, for example in 
the case of a real medical emergency on the ride. Finally, 
broadcasting this type of information might potentially 
reduce spectators’ motivation to try the ride for themselves.
# Para 875 16
In short, our technology is perturbing what is a subtle 
balance of awareness and communication among the three 
roles of performer, spectator and orchestrator, potentially 
closing down some useful ambiguity in what is after all an 
edgy experience in which many people will feel scared for a 
while, but may ultimately feel relieved or even proud for 
having seen it through. This implies a degree of selection 
and editorial control over the use of the telemetry data. The 
big question here is how should this be done? Should both 
riders and orchestrators have the ability to switch off the 
public broadcast? Should users be able to vet and approve 
their videos after the event, but losing the element of 
liveness? Or should we further differentiate between 
spectators, for example transmitting the live telemetry only 
to the mobile phones of selected friends and family? These 
questions remain open for further exploration.
# Para 891 1
Implications for research on spectator interfaces
# Para 892 20
More generally, our study speaks to recent design 
frameworks for spectator interfaces. Building on [2], we 
argue that interactive performance involves a balance 
between three broad roles: performers, spectators and 
orchestrators, each of which may be further specialised and 
subdivided. Our study is novel because it introduces a new 
performance technology into an established situation, 
highlighting the way in which an existing balance of 
relationships between these roles is perturbed. Our study 
also suggests that while it may be useful to reason about 
how spectators experience performers’ interactions in terms 
of revealing or hiding manipulations and effects as 
proposed in [13], that this is not a complete view. Instead, 
we also need to consider how orchestrators experience 
performers’ interactions and beyond this, consider more 
selective revealing or hiding or interactions at different 
times or to different classes of spectator. Finally, we 
observe that a degree of ambiguity about who can observe 
what may support the subtleties of orchestration and for 
saving face in difficult circumstances.
# Para 912 1
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
# Para 913 27
In conclusion, we suggest that personal telemetry systems 
attached to spectator interfaces have the potential to 
significantly enhance amusement rides. We have seen that 
our prototype can provide an engaging experience for 
spectators, especially when compared to their traditional 
role of ‘holding the bags’. Beyond this, our study suggests 
that telemetry systems can also enhance the experience of 
riding and even operating a ride, providing that they are 
sensitively designed and deployed to avoid embarrassment 
and leave sufficient latitude for operational control. Key to 
this is recognising and supporting the bi-modal nature of 
riders’ performances, moving between moments of lucid 
commentary and less restrained flow, and also respecting 
some of the subtleties inherent in deciding when riders are 
‘normally’ scared compared to when there is an unusual 
situation that requires action. If these challenges can be met 
then we believe that telemetry systems may help restore 
some of the traditional ‘old school’ ride showmanship that 
may have been lost in the scaling up to today’s massive 
high-intensity rides. From an HCI point of view, our study 
adds to the growing corpus of literature on spectator and 
public interfaces, showing how designers need to consider 
the balance of relationships between performers, spectators 
and orchestrators, and how introducing a new interactive 
technology can perturb these in subtle ways. Key here is the 
requirement to selectively reveal aspects of a performer’s 
experience to different kinds of spectator.
# Para 940 7
We conclude by noting some directions for future work. A 
major challenge lies in scaling up the approach to work 
within high-throughput environments such as theme parks 
which raises several questions. Should the technology 
(cameras, microphones, sensors and communications) be 
embedded into the ride in order to avoid delays in donning 
and removing equipment and improve reliability? Or should
# Para 947 1
1175
# Para 948 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 949 10
such systems remain wearable so that they can sense people 
before and after the ride experience and can easily transfer 
between other rides? Here we speculate that the medium 
term approach will be to embed them in rides, but that in 
the long term there may be advantages in integrating them 
with future wearable health monitoring, sports and leisure 
equipment. A second issue for scale concerns the spectator 
interface; should these be large public displays or might it 
be better to flexibly route different riders’ data streams to 
smaller groups of mobile devices?
# Para 959 14
Beyond this, there may be greater potential to use 
biosensing data to drive different aspects of the experience, 
for example providing useful cues for identifying key 
moments of an experience as part of automatically editing 
souvenir videos, or perhaps even enabling new rides that 
directly adapt themselves to a rider’s level of excitement. In 
spite of several early explorations of using biosensing to 
either evaluate or control entertainment and other 
applications within HCI (e.g., [3,9,10,14]), developing such 
applications requires a far deeper understanding of the 
nature of biosensing in relation to experience that we have 
at present – especially where humans are in a feedback loop 
involving extreme movements – providing a challenging 
but certainly intriguing direction for long-term research.
# Para 973 1
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
# Para 974 7
The authors would like to acknowledge funding for this 
work which was provided by the UK Engineering and 
Physical Sciences Research Council through the Equator 
Interdisciplinary Research Consortium (EPSRC grant 
GR/N15986/01). Additional thanks to Angus Clark, 
Mauricio Capra, Josh Greifer, Andrew French, Jan Humble, 
Tuvi Orbach, Kher Hui Ng and Anthony Steed.
# Para 981 1
REFERENCES
# Para 982 3
1. Aoki, P. and Woodruff, A., Ambiguity in the Design of 
Personal Communication Systems, in Proc. CHI2005, 
ACM Press (2005), 181-191.
# Para 985 5
2. Benford, S., Crabtree, A., Reeves, S., Flintham, M., 
Drozd, A., Sheridan, J. and Dix, A., The Frame of the 
Game: Blurring the Boundary between Fiction and 
Reality in Mobile Experiences, in Proc. CHI2006, 
ACM Press(2006), 427-436.
# Para 990 6
3. Brogni, A., Vinayagamoorthy, V., Steed, A., and 
Slater, M. Variations in physiological responses of 
participants during different stages of an immersive 
virtual environment experiment. In Proc. Symposium 
on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, ACM 
Press (2006), 376-382.
# Para 996 1
4. Chen, J., Flow in Games (and everything else),
# Para 997 1
Communications of the ACM, 50, 4, (2007) 31-34.
# Para 998 1
5. Coverage of the 2006 formula one motor racing season,
# Para 999 1
broadcast in the UK by the Independent Television
# Para 1000 1
Network (ITV) (2006), www.itv-f1.com/ (verified 14th
# Para 1001 1
December 2006). 
# Para 1002 5
6. Crabtree, A., Tandavanitj, N., Steed, A., Benford, S., 
Rodden, T., Greenhalgh, C., Flintham, M., Anastasi, 
R., Drozd, A., Adams, M. and Row-Farr, J., 
Orchestrating a mixed reality game &apos;on the ground, in 
Proc. CHI2004, ACM Press (2004), 391-398.
# Para 1007 4
7. Heath, C., Luff, P. K., vom Lehn, D., Hindmarsh, J., 
and Cleverly, J., Crafting participation: Designing 
ecologies, configuring experience. Visual 
Communication 1, 1, (2002), 9-34.
# Para 1011 5
8. Koleva, B., Taylor, I., Benford, S., Fraser, M., 
Greenhalgh, C., Schnädelbach, H., vom Lehn, D., 
Heath, C., Row-Farr, J., Orchestrating a Mixed Reality 
Performance, in Proc. CHI2001, ACM Press (2001), 
38-45.
# Para 1016 3
9. Mandryk, R. and Inkpen, K., Physiological indicators 
for the evaluation of co-located collaborative play, in 
Proc. CSCW2004, ACM Press (2004). 102-111.
# Para 1019 4
10. Nenonen, V., Lindblad, A., Häkinnen, V., Laitinen, T., 
Jouhtio, M., Hämäläinen, P., Using heart-rate to control 
an interactive game, in Proc. CHI 2007, ACM Press 
(2007), 853-858.
# Para 1023 3
11. Nichols, K., They Seek Him here, They Seek Him 
There: True Tales of a Travelling Showman, Keith 
Nichols, UK, 1995.
# Para 1026 4
12. Pausch, R., Snoddy, J., Taylor, R., Watson, S., and 
Haseltine, E. 1996. Disney’s Aladdin: first steps 
toward storytelling in virtual reality, in Proc. 
SIGGRAPH96, ACM Press (1996), 193-203.
# Para 1030 3
13. Reeves, S., Benford, S., O&apos;Malley, C. and Fraser, M., 
Designing the spectator experience, in Proc. CHI2005, 
ACM Press (2005), 741-750.
# Para 1033 4
14. Rowe, D., Silbert, J. and Irwin, D. Heart Rate 
Variability: Indicator of User State as an Aid to 
Human-Computer Interaction, in Proc. CHI98, ACM 
Press (1998), 480-487.
# Para 1037 5
15. Trowell, I., Fairground rides – a chronological 
development. Published by the national fairground 
archive. 
www.nfa.dept.shef.ac.uk/history/rides/index.php 
(verified 12th January 2007).
# Para 1042 3
16. vom Lehn, D., Heath, C. and Hindmarsh, J., Exhibiting 
interaction: Conduct and collaboration in museums and 
galleries. Symbolic Interaction, 24, 2, 189-216.
# Para 1045 5
17. Walker, B., Schnädelbach, H., Rennick Egglestone, S., 
Clarke, A., Ng, K.H., Wright, M., Rodden, T., Benford, 
S. and French, A. Augmenting amusement rides with 
telemetry, in Proc. ACE2007, ACM Press (2007), 115- 
122.
# Para 1050 4
18. Worsell, N. and Ioannides, A. Safety integrity levels of 
fairground ride control systems. Published by UK 
Health and Safety Executive and available through the 
UK Health and Safety Laboratory library.
# Para 1054 1
1176
