# Para 0 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 1 1
Exploring the Use of Tangible User Interfaces
# Para 2 1
for Human-Robot Interaction: A Comparative Study
# Para 3 4
Cheng Guo
University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive NW.
Calgary, Alberta, Canada, T2N 1N4
cheguo@cpsc.ucalgary.ca
# Para 7 1
ABSTRACT
# Para 8 16
In this paper we suggest the use of tangible user interfaces 
(TUIs) for human-robot interaction (HRI) applications. We 
discuss the potential benefits of this approach while 
focusing on low-level of autonomy tasks. We present an 
experimental robotic interaction test bed to support our 
investigation. We use the test bed to explore two HRI-
related task-sets: robotic navigation control and robotic 
posture control. We discuss the implementation of these 
two task-sets using an AIBOTM robot dog. Both tasks were 
mapped to two different robotic control interfaces: keypad 
interface which resembles the interaction approach 
currently common in HRI, and a gesture input mechanism 
based on Nintendo WiiTM game controllers. We discuss the 
interfaces implementation and conclude with a detailed user 
study for evaluating these different HRI techniques in the 
two robotic tasks-sets.
# Para 24 1
ACM Classification Keywords
# Para 25 1
H5.2	[Information	interfaces	and presentation]:
# Para 26 1
User Interfaces – Interaction Styles
# Para 27 1
Author Keywords
# Para 28 2
Human-Robot Interaction, Tangible User Interface, Gesture 
Input
# Para 30 1
INTRODUCTION
# Para 31 9
Over the last few decades a large variety of robots have 
been introduced to numerous applications, tasks and 
markets. They range, for example, from robotic arms that 
are used in space station assemblies to explosive ordnance 
disposal robots dispatched on battlefields. Depending on the 
task difficulty and the complexity, the interaction 
techniques used by the human operator to control a robot 
may vary from simple mouse clicks to complicate 
operations on a specialized hardware.
# Para 40 4
When performing tasks, the human operator may need to 
break down high-level commands such as “pick up that 
object” into a sequence of low-level discrete actions that the 
robot can perform, and then translate each action to a key or
# Para 44 6
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
# Para 50 1
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
# Para 51 1
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00
# Para 52 4
Ehud Sharlin
University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive NW.
Calgary, Alberta, Canada, T2N 1N4
ehud@cpsc.ucalgary.ca
# Para 56 18
switch on the user interface to trigger the appropriate action 
on the robotic platform. The necessity to perform high-level 
task planning and management through the composition of 
low-level actions is not ideal. Depending on the low-level 
set of interactions, the overall experience can be unnatural, 
confusing and can cause task failure and endanger the robot 
in case of critical tasks. As the level of task difficulty 
increases, it is ideal if the operator spends more time on 
high-level problem solving and task planning than on low- 
level robot operations. Intuitive interfaces, well mapped to 
specific human-robot interaction (HRI) tasks, can allow 
users to focus on tasks goals rather than on the micro-scale 
operations needed to accomplish these goals. We believe 
that orthodox input devices such as keyboards and joysticks 
can often hinder higher-level interactive tasks as their 
physicality (layout of keys and buttons) is limited and 
cannot always be mapped intuitively to a large set of 
robotic actions.
# Para 74 19
The aforementioned problem can be tackled by searching 
for natural and intuitive input methods for robotic 
interfaces, with one possible avenue being the use of 
gestures. Studies have shown that children begin to gesture 
at around 10 months of age [18] and that humans continue 
to develop their gesturing skills from childhood to 
adolescence [17]. This natural skill coupled with speech 
enables us to interact and communicate with each other 
more effectively. In contrast, moving a mouse and typing 
on a keyboard, which are arguably not difficult to learn, are 
acquired skills that are not as innate as performing gestures 
with our hands and arms. Also, the generic nature of the 
mouse and keyboard cause them to be inappropriate for 
certain tasks, which can break the flow of users’ cognitive 
engagement with the task, negatively impacting 
performance [8]. Can specialized gesture controlled input 
devices offer more efficient mappings from human to robot 
than the prevalent keyboard, joystick and mouse interface 
for a certain set of HRI tasks?
# Para 93 11
Tangible user interfaces (TUIs) exploit embodied 
interaction [6], coupling physical objects with computerized 
qualities, and ideally empowering users with simple and 
natural physical interaction metaphors. Intuitive, efficient 
spatial mappings underlie the design of tangible user 
interfaces [19, 23]. TUIs make effective use of the 
affordances [19] of physical objects which can directly 
represent their functionality. The shape, size and weight 
along with other physical properties of a physical object 
imply the way we interact with it. By taking the advantage 
of the affordances of physical objects we may design a set
# Para 104 1
121
# Para 105 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 106 14
of physical robotic interfaces directly mapped to the 
physical aspects and the potential functionalities of robotic 
platforms. Furthermore, the spatial orientation and the 
position of a physical object in relation to its surroundings 
can reveal additional information and provide interaction 
insight and task awareness to the manipulator. When 
controlling a robot, maintaining good situational awareness 
[7] is crucial to the operator. If a physical object can be 
transformed into a tool for controlling a robot, then the 
orientation and position of the object in the physical space 
can be utilized to provide additional information about the 
status of a robot. We see great potential in using TUI-based 
mediators for supporting more natural human-robot 
interfaces.
# Para 120 13
To explore the possibilities of applying TUIs to HRI, we 
utilized the Nintendo WiiTM controllers, the Wiimote and 
Nunchuk, as generic TUI for capturing human postures. 
The Wiimote can be viewed as a generic 3D TUI, similarly 
to the view of the mouse as a generic and very successful 
2D TUI [23]. The Wiimote can also be seen as a gestural 
interface [3], arguably representing a gestural/TUI duality 
which is a key to its commercial success. We believe that 
the Wiimote supports simple tangible interaction metaphors 
and techniques that could not have been as successful with 
pure gestural interaction (that is, with no physical 
embodiment, and with no physical interface to hold and 
manipulate).
# Para 133 12
To utilize the power of the Wiimote, we used it as a robotic 
interface for fusing dynamic human postures and gestures 
with robotic actions. (Figure 1) In order to assess the 
quality and effectiveness of the Wiimote and Nunchuk as 
robotic interface, we designed an experimental test bed that 
allowed us to test them against a generic input device – a 
keypad, with a robot that has 0% autonomy and 100% 
intervention ratio [29]. Our experimental test bed was based 
on a Sony AIBOTM robot dog which the user had to control 
through a variety of tasks. We used the test bed to conduct a 
user study investigating the advantages and drawbacks of 
each interaction method in practical HRI tasks.
# Para 145 7
In this paper we briefly present related TUIs efforts and 
other instances of gesture input interfaces in the field of 
HRI. We describe in detail our Wiimote and Nunchuk 
interaction technique implementation, the baseline keypad 
interface and the robotic test bed. We present our 
experimental design, the comparative user study and its 
results. We discuss the findings and their implications on
# Para 152 1
Figure 1. Wiimote, Nunchuk and AIBO 
# Para 153 2
using gestures in Human-Robot Interaction tasks vis-à-vis a 
more orthodox keyboard-based approach.
# Para 155 1
RELATED WORK
# Para 156 21
HRI is a relatively new sub area of study in HCI. A large 
amount of effort in the field of robotics has been spent on 
the development of hardware and software to extend the 
functionality and intelligence of robotic platforms. 
Compared to the substantial increase in the variety of robots 
and their capabilities, the techniques people use to 
command and control them remain relatively unchanged. 
As robots are being deployed in more demanding situations, 
the need for meaningful and intuitive interaction techniques 
for controlling them has raised a considerable amount of 
attention among HRI researchers. In terms of interface 
design, Goodrich and Olsen’s [11] work provided a general 
guide to HRI researchers on how to design an effective user 
interface. Drury, Yanco and Scholtz had defined a set of 
HRI taxonomies [29] and conducted a thorough study [28] 
on how to improve human operators’ awareness of rescue 
robots and their surroundings. To broaden the view of HRI 
researchers in interface design, Richer and Drury [22] had 
summarized and formed a video game-based framework 
that can be used to characterize and analyze robotic 
interfaces.
# Para 177 13
Yanco and Drury defined and detailed sets of robotic 
interfaces terminologies and definitions in an effort to 
classify the different HRI approaches explored in the 
domain [29]. Specially, they defined that a robot’s 
autonomy level can be being measured as the percentage of 
task time in which the robot is carrying out its task on its 
own. In correspondence, the amount of intervention 
required for a robot to function is measured as the 
percentage of task time in which a human operator must be 
controlling the robot. These two measures, autonomy and 
intervention, sum up to 100% [29]. In this paper, we are 
mainly focused on interactions with robot of low autonomy 
level.
# Para 190 21
The notion of tangible user interfaces [13] is based on 
Fitzmaurice et al.’s earlier Graspable User Interfaces effort 
[10]. Fitzmaurice and Buxton have conducted an 
experiment which allowed users to use “Bricks” [9] as 
physical handles to direct manipulate virtual objects. Their 
study has shown that a space-multiplex input scheme with 
specialized devices can outperform a time-multiplex (e.g., 
mouse-based) input design for certain situations. [9] Later, 
Ishii and Ullmer proposed the term Tangible User 
Interfaces [13] and addressed the importance of both the 
foreground interaction which consists of using physical 
objects to manipulate virtual entities and the background 
interaction which happens at the periphery to enhance 
users’ awareness using ambient media in an augmented 
space. In our research, we focus on the essence of TUIs 
which is defined by Ishii as “seamless coupling everyday 
graspable objects with the digital information that pertains 
to them” [13]. Moreover, we want to select a TUI that has a 
tight spatial mapping [23] with robotic actions. Spatial 
mapping can be defined as “the relationship between the 
object’s spatial characteristics and the way it is being
# Para 211 1
122
# Para 212 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 213 3
used” [23]. A “good” TUI for HRI should take advantage of 
its physical and spatial characteristics to reflect the physical 
state or function of robots.
# Para 216 10
Another quality of TUIs that can make them an interesting 
choice for HRI tasks is I/O unification, or the natural 
coupling of action and perception space [23]. TUIs, like any 
physical object, can allow the user to perceive and act at the 
same place and at the same time. This quality is often lost 
in orthodox interfaces that usually separate action space 
(e.g. mouse) from perception space (e.g. display). By 
capturing this natural quality of physical objects, TUIs can 
allow the user to be more attentive and focus on the task at 
hand.
# Para 226 11
Beaudouin-Lafon [4] discusses measures for the mapping of 
physical controllers to their use in digital applications. He 
defines &quot;degree of integration&quot; as the ratio between the degrees 
of freedom of the controller to the degrees of freedom of the 
entity being controlled. “Degree of compatibility” is defined as 
the similarity between the actions performed on the controller 
to the reaction of the entity being controlled [4]. Although 
Beaudouin-Lafon does not discuss mapping between TUIs to 
robotic tasks, we believe the measures introduced in his work 
can be adapted to HRI and we use them later in this paper to 
evaluate the different mappings we implemented.
# Para 237 17
Using gestures to interact with robots is not a new idea. A 
significant amount of work has been done using either 
vision based [12] or glove based mechanisms [24] to 
capture human arm and hand gestures. Among these efforts, 
we found that Korenkamp et al.’s [15] work is somewhat 
similar in approach to the gesture recognition technique we 
used. Their paper presented a vision-based technique to 
monitor the angles between a person’s forearm and upper 
arm to predict the gesture that the person is performing. 
Korenkamp et al.’s efforts were based on a single arm-only 
interaction, mapped to two main robotic actions: “stop” and 
“point-at-target”. For our approach, we used the Wiimote 
and Nunchuk to detect the rotation angle of a person’s 
shoulder and elbow joints in relation to the arm rest 
position. Moreover, our system supports simultaneous 
movements of two arms with eight different gesture-to-
action mappings.
# Para 254 18
Another interesting approach to the integration of the 
human body as a robotic input device is exoskeletons 
system [5, 14]. Kazerooni et al.’s [14] research was focused 
on augmenting the human body with robotic arms to extend 
the physical strength of an individual. The human operator 
wore a robotic arm to directly apply mechanical power and 
information signals [14] to the robot. By measuring the 
dynamic contact force applied by the human operator, the 
robotic limbs are able to amplify that force for performing 
heavy duty tasks that normal human strength would not be 
able to perform. The Robotnaut project [5] uses similar 
concept but a different approach to interact with robots. 
Bluethmann et al. adopted a master-slave system approach 
which requires the human operator to wear gloves equipped 
with Polhemus trackers for detecting arm and hand 
positions [5]. The Robonaut operator remotely controls the 
Robonaut from a distance without physically touching it. 
Both of the interaction techniques mentioned above allow
# Para 272 2
human operators to directly manipulate a robot that is either 
collocated or remotely located.
# Para 274 16
To extend the notion of TUI to the field of HRI, two 
projects have demonstrated the potential of using physical 
objects to manipulate robots. The Topobo toy application 
[21] allows kids to assemble static and motorized plastic 
components to dynamically created biomorphic forms. The 
system is able to replay motions created by twisting and 
pulling the motorized components to animate users&apos; 
creations. By combining physical input and output within 
the system itself, Topobo allows kids to learn about 
mechanics and kinematics through rapid trial-and-error. 
[21] A pioneering effort that utilizes physical object for 
controlling a robot is presented by Quigley et al. [20]. In 
one of the studies presented in their paper the authors 
suggest the use of a physical icon (Phicon [13]) to directly 
manipulate the roll and pitch angle of a mini-unmanned 
aerial vehicle (mini-UAV).
# Para 290 1
SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
# Para 291 23
In order to explore the possibility of using gestures for HRI, 
we were looking for a robotic platform that would allow us 
to have full and flexible control in lab settings. The robot 
should be able to response to both high level commands 
(such as walking or turning) and low-level commands (such 
as rotate a specific joint by a certain number of degrees) to 
match the meaning of both abstract gestures (such as 
arbitrary hand gestures used in a speech) and specific 
gestures (such as teaching others a specific movement by 
demonstrating a similar gesture). Moreover, we were 
searching for an anthropomorphic or zoomorphic robot that 
resembles the human skeletal structure to a degree in order 
to achieve an intuitive mapping between the user interface 
and the robot. In search for robots that satisfy the above 
criteria, we found that the AIBO robotic dog can be a 
suitable platform for our studies. The AIBO is a 
zoomorphic robot that resembles parts of the human 
skeletal structure. For instance, the AIBO has “shoulder” 
and “elbow” joints on its forelegs which act similarly to 
human’s shoulder and elbow joints. By using the Tekkotsu 
framework [25], developers can gain full control over the 
low-level actuators and high-level body gestures and 
movements of the AIBO.
# Para 314 16
To evaluate the usability of gesture input for HRI in 
contrast with a generic input device we have designed two 
interaction techniques for manipulating an AIBO in a 
collocated setup. One of the interaction techniques supports 
human gesture input through a Wiimote and Nunchuk 
interfaces, another input technique uses a keypad as the 
basis for interacting with the AIBO. During the selection of 
TUIs, the Nintendo Wiimote came to our attention. The 
Wiimote clearly differentiates itself from other generic 
controllers in terms of the interaction style. Instead of 
pressing buttons, the Wiimote allows players to use motions 
such as, swing, shake and thrust to interact with the virtual 
objects on the TV screen. Players feel more immersed and 
satisfied when using the Wiimote due to the fact that virtual 
entities in games react to their physical inputs. Although the 
Wiimote does not qualify as a highly specialized TUI, we
# Para 330 1
123
# Para 331 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 332 13
believe it can be categorized as a generic 3D tangible user 
interface due to its ability to capture physical input and to 
interact with digital entities. Due to its generality, we think 
that the Wiimote’s basic physical affordances are a good, 
fundamental starting point for exploring the use of TUIs in 
HRI tasks. Success in mapping a robotic task to a 
tangible/gestural interaction via a simple TUI will point to 
the great potential of better and more elaborate TUIs in 
more complex HRI tasks. In order to utilize the power of 
Wiimote and apply it to control an AIBO, we used a PC 
equipped with both Bluetooth and 802.11b wireless 
network adapter to act as a mediator to translate and 
transmit the command from the Wiimote to the AIBO.
# Para 345 8
Another interface that we selected for representing the 
generic input device is an OQO 02 Ultra-Mobile PC 
(UMPC) with an onboard thumb keyboard. The OQO 02 is 
a scaled down version of a regular desktop PC. It has built- 
in wireless network adapter that can be used to 
communicate with an AIBO. The OQO-based “button-press 
and key-to-action mapping” interaction style represents a 
common interaction technique in current HRI.
# Para 353 8
When designing the interface we had to deal with a short 
(about 500ms) latency issue, resulting from the wireless 
network transmission and the robot’s electromechanical 
startup time. To maintain the fairness of the experiment, the 
underlying controlling code for both techniques was 
identical. Thus, the amount of lag the participants 
experienced was the same using both techniques, unless 
there were random wireless transmission spikes.
# Para 361 1
Wiimote &amp; Nunchuk Input
# Para 362 12
The Wiimote consists of a D-pad, a speaker, four LEDs and 
eight buttons. It communicates with the Wii via Bluetooth 
wireless link. A complete 3-axis accelerometer [1] located 
inside the Wiimote measures a minimum full-scale range of 
± 3g with 10% sensitivity. It can measure the static 
acceleration of gravity in tilt-sensing applications, as well 
as dynamic acceleration resulting from motion, shock, or 
vibration. [1] An extension port is located on the bottom of 
the Wiimote to allow peripherals such as a Nunchuk to be 
attached. The Nunchuk has an analog stick and two buttons 
and uses the same accelerometer on the Wiimote to support 
motion sensing.
# Para 374 1
Accelerometer
# Para 375 4
In order to understand the Wiimote’s motion sensing 
capability, we need to examine its acceleration measuring 
mechanism. According to the Data sheet [1] of the ADXL 
330 accelerometer:
# Para 379 10
“The sensor is a polysilicon surface micromachined 
structure built on top of a silicon wafer. Polysilicon springs 
suspend the structure over the surface of the wafer and 
provide a resistance against acceleration forces. Deflection 
of the structure is measured using a differential capacitor 
that consists of independent fixed plates and plates attached 
to the moving mass... Acceleration deflects the moving 
mass and unbalances the differential capacitor resulting in a 
senior output whose amplitude is proportional to 
acceleration.”
# Para 389 23
In other words, the sensor does not measure the acceleration 
of the Wiimote, but rather the force exerted by the test mass 
on its supporting springs. [27] When the Wiimote is at rest 
on a flat surface the accelerometer reading is 1 g 
(approximately 9.8 m/s2) due to gravity. When it is in a free 
fall motion, the reading is close to zero. These facts implies 
that one, we can only derive a relatively accurate measuring 
of the pitch and roll angle of the Wiimote when it is 
reasonably still. This is because when the Wiimote is 
accelerating (e.g. when a user is swinging the Wiimote), the 
acceleration value sensed by the Wiimote is due to the force 
exerted by the user rather than the pulling of gravity. Thus, 
the tilting angle derived based on this force does not 
represent the current position of the Wiimote. Two, the 
accelerometer cannot detect the rotation angle around the 
gravitational axis. For instance, when the Wiimote is facing 
up (e.g. the A button is facing upward) and resting on a flat 
surface, the Z-axis (Figure 2) of the accelerometer is 
parallel to the direction of gravity. Thus, it does not matter 
how we orient the Wiimote on the surface, the acceleration 
value sensed on the Z-axis always remains the same. This 
means we lose one degree of freedom when one of the axes 
of the accelerometer aligns with the direction of the gravity.
# Para 412 1
Figure 2. The coordinate system of Wiimote
# Para 413 13
Due to the constraints associated with the accelerometer 
and the unavailability of a motion analyzing package, we 
are left with the choice of measuring pitch and roll angles 
for recognizing arm and hand gestures. In our experiment, 
we want to allow users to use large arm movements for 
controlling an AIBO, because large movements are easier 
to distinguish when processing the Wiimote data and also 
easier to memorize by the user. Therefore, we decided to 
rely on only using the pitch angle of the Wiimote and 
Nunchuk to predict arm positions. In this case, we use the 
Wiimote and Nunchuk as a one degree of freedom input 
devices to measure the rotation angle of a person’s elbow 
and shoulder joint in relation to the arm rest position.
# Para 426 7
In order to access the acceleration value sensed by the 
Wiimote and Nunchuk we used Brian Peek’s C# library 
[16] for acquiring the accelerometer readings. To covert the 
raw acceleration value into rotation angles, we enter the 
calibrated raw acceleration values into the following 
equation, where the variable ay denotes the calibrated 
acceleration value along the Y-axis: [26]
# Para 433 1
Pitch = asin (ay / 1)
# Para 434 1
OQO 02 Thumb Keyboard
# Para 435 4
The generic input device that we have chosen is the thumb 
keyboard on an OQO 02 UMPC. The OQO 02 is equipped 
with a 1.5 GHz VIA C7M ULV CPU, 1GB DDR2 SDRAM 
and a 60GB HDD. It runs on Windows® XP Tablet PC
# Para 439 1
124
# Para 440 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 441 10
Edition 2005. It supports both 802.11 a/b/g and Bluetooth 
network standards. The input devices on the OQO 02 
include a dedicated mouse, a backlit thumb keyboard with a 
total of 58 keys (including function keys, letter keys and a 
number pad) and a digital pen. The letter keys on the thumb 
keyboard follow the QWERTY keyboard layout. The OQO 
02 can be either powered by a removable lithium-ion 
polymer battery or an AC charger. For our comparative 
study we used the thumb keyboard only for controlling an 
AIBO.
# Para 451 1
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
# Para 452 10
To compare and better understand how well people can 
learn and utilize the aforementioned techniques when 
controlling a robot, we designed an experimental test bed 
based on two tasks for comparing the techniques in terms of 
speed, accuracy and subjective preferences of the 
participants. Our goal was to explore the benefits and 
drawbacks associated with each interaction technique, and 
to try to point out which technique supports a more 
effective, intuitive and rich user experience when 
interacting with a robot.
# Para 462 1
Pilot Study
# Para 463 17
Before the full user study, we had conducted a pilot study to 
test the usability of both interaction techniques and the 
experiment fairness under different conditions. Our pilot 
study included 8 participants recruited from our lab. We 
found that our posture recognition technique does not suit 
well with people who have large body size. Thus, we 
changed our system to allow for a more flexible range of 
input. However, misrecognition still occurred during the 
pilot study. To minimize the impact of this problem on the 
participants’ task completion time, we modified the 
underlying software component that supports the interaction 
to automatically record the time when each posture 
command is triggered. The examiner also used the same 
software to manually log the time when a correct posture is 
preformed by pressing a button on a keyboard. A video tape 
recorder is used for backup purposes, capturing the entire 
experiment for replay and time synchronization purposes.
# Para 480 11
To enable participants to navigate the AIBO, we initially 
used the “W, A, S and D” key mapping on the OQO keypad 
for the navigation test. However, in this particular key 
arrangement, users only need to use their left thumb for 
most of the movements they need to perform. On the other 
hand, with the Wiimote technique, users have to use both 
hands with equal amount of effort to navigate the AIBO. To 
balance the single hand interaction technique with an 
asymmetric bimanual [2] interaction technique we revised 
the key mapping of the keypad interface (the revised 
mapping is explained in detail in the next section).
# Para 491 1
USER STUDY
# Para 492 1
Participants
# Para 493 5
For the comparative user study, we recruited twenty 
participants (16 males and 4 females) from the University 
of Calgary; each participant was paid $10 for taking part in 
the experiment. Ages ranged from 18 to 29 (M = 21.75, SD 
= 3.05). All of the participants reported to use computer
# Para 498 12
keyboard everyday. Among all of the participants, eighteen 
people were right-handed, one person was left-handed and 
one person was ambidextrous. All of the participants 
indicated that they have some sort of computer game 
experience. Fifteen participants reported to play computer 
games on a daily or weekly basis. Seventeen participants 
indicated that they “often” or “very often” use computer 
keyboard to play games. Six participants reported no prior 
experience playing the Nintendo Wii. Out of the fourteen 
people who had previous experience with the Wii only 
three participants reported to play it on a weekly basis. The 
other 11 indicated playing either “Monthly” or “Rarely”.
# Para 510 1
Task and Procedure
# Para 511 19
Our experiment was designed for two different tasks, 
robotic navigation and robotic posture, each with two 
difficulty levels. The participants were asked to perform 
both tasks with both interaction techniques. Thus, in total, 
participants had to go through four sub experiments in order 
to complete the study. The order of techniques was 
counterbalanced among participants by alternating the tasks 
order, thus ten participants started with the Wiimote 
Interface and ten participants started with the OQO 
interface. The experiment was conducted following a 
written protocol. Participants were asked to start with one 
interaction technique to complete both navigation and 
posture tasks and then switch to the other technique and 
repeat the two tasks. During the experiment, each 
participant was asked to complete four sets of 
questionnaires after each trial and, once finished, to 
complete a post-study questionnaire which was followed up 
with a non-structured interview. Each study took around 60 
min. to complete.
# Para 530 8
To allow participants to learn and practice each interaction 
technique and to familiarize themselves with the tasks a 
practice trial was administrated before the full experiment 
started. The administrator demonstrated the interaction 
techniques and presented guidelines on how to complete the 
tasks. Then, the participants would try out the interaction 
technique until they felt proficient and comfortable to move 
on.
# Para 538 4
The main dependent measure in the experiment was the 
task completion time. In addition, we recorded the number 
of errors that the participants made with each interaction 
technique.
# Para 542 1
Task 1 – Navigation
# Para 543 1
Description
# Para 544 9
In this task, the participants were asked to navigate the 
AIBO through an obstacle course (Figure 3). The obstacle 
course is 262 cm in length and 15.3 cm in width. The goal 
of this test is to see how well both interaction techniques 
support user control in a fairly delicate robotic navigation 
task. We provided the user with eight different navigation 
control actions: walk forward, stop, walk forward while 
turning left, walk forward while turning right, rotate left, 
rotate right, strafe left and strafe right.
# Para 553 2
To motivate the participants to use all actions, we designed 
two routes for the task. For the easier route, participants
# Para 555 1
125
# Para 556 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 557 11
were not forced to use any particular action during the 
course of the obstacle course and were allowed to use any 
combination of actions they want. However, for the harder 
route, participants were forced to use rotation and strafing 
in addition to walking and turning in order to complete the 
obstacle course successfully. A dotted yellow line on the 
course (Figure 3) indicated the starting point of the strafing 
action. The solid yellow line indicated the starting point of 
the rotate right action. In order to finish this task, the 
participants were asked to complete the easier route first 
followed by the harder trail.
# Para 568 20
Before the start of the experiment, we reminded the 
participants to complete the obstacle course as fast as 
possible, and try to make as few errors as possible. An error 
in this task is defined as hitting obstacles, navigating the 
AIBO out of the route boundary or failure to perform 
required actions at the specified locations. If a participant 
navigated the AIBO out of the route boundary, then she/he 
had to navigate it back to the route and continue on. If a 
participant failed to perform the required action at certain 
locations during the trial the examiner had to physically 
move the AIBO back to that location and ask the participant 
to try again. This error correction mechanism could have 
introduced a variable amount of time into the task 
completion time depending on how fast the examiner 
moves the AIBO back to the right location. We emphasized 
the “penalizing” implications of this set of errors to 
participants and were pleasantly surprised to see that none 
of the experimental trials required the administrator to 
physically move the AIBO or to manually correct any out-
of-bound navigation errors.
# Para 588 1
Interaction Techniques
# Para 589 9
In this task, the function mapping for the Wiimote interface 
is presented in Figure 4 and the mapping for the keypad 
interface is presented in Figure 5. The gesture mapping for 
the Wiimote controller was developed based on horseback 
riding techniques metaphor. The participants were told to 
think of the pair of Wiimotes as a neck rein on the AIBO. 
For instance, pulling both Wiimotes back will stop the 
AIBO; pulling the right Wiimote only will rotate the AIBO 
to the right, etc.
# Para 598 9
Due to the nature of the task, the gesture-to-robot action 
mapping is somewhat indirect. In this case, the participants 
are not controlling a single joint of the AIBO but rather the 
spatial kinematics of the robot when navigating it through 
the obstacle course. This implies a non-ideal “degree of 
integration”, and a weaker “degree of compatibility” [4] for the 
gesture-to-robot action mapping in this task. However, we can 
argue that the horseback riding metaphor provides efficient and 
intuitive mechanism for dealing with this abstract mapping.
# Para 607 6
The keypad-to-robot action mappings are: Forward – W + 
2, Stop – S + 5, Forward + Turning Left – A + 2, Forward + 
Turning right – W + 6, Strafe Left – A + 4, Strafe Right – D 
+ 6, Rotate Left – S + 2, and Rotate Right – W + 5. (the 
plus sign means pressing and holding the keys on both side 
of the sign).
# Para 613 2
The Data collected from this task was analyzed using a 2 x 
2 within-subjects ANOVA for the following factors:
# Para 615 1
•	Technique: Wiimote, Keypad
# Para 616 1
•	Difficulty: easy, hard.
# Para 617 1
Task 2 - Posture
# Para 618 1
Description
# Para 619 19
This task is used to examine the usability of both interaction 
techniques for low-level robot control. In this task, we 
asked the participants to perform twelve different postures 
with the forelegs of the AIBO. We displayed an image of 
the AIBO with a posture on a computer screen. Then the 
participants were asked to control the AIBO to imitate that 
posture. In the experiment setup, we have pre-defined four 
different postures for each foreleg of the AIBO. (Figure 6) 
We selected ten postures out of the sixteen possible 
combined postures using both forelegs. Then, we divided 
them into two groups of postures which can be chained 
together to create gesture sequences (Figure 9). The only 
difference between these groups of postures is that in order 
to transform from one posture to another within a group, the 
participants have to manipulate either one foreleg or both 
forelegs of the AIBO to complete the transition. We define 
the group of postures that require only one arm movement 
during the transition as the easier set, and the other group as 
the harder set. For the experiment, the participants were
# Para 638 2
Figure 4. The Wiimote interaction technique for
controlling the movement of the AIBO
# Para 640 1
Figure 3. The obstacle course
# Para 641 1
Figure 5. Key – Movement Mapping	Figure 6. The possible postures for each foreleg of the
# Para 642 1
AIBO
# Para 643 1
126
# Para 644 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 645 2
asked to perform the easier set first followed by the harder 
set.
# Para 647 21
Similar to task 1, we measure the task completion time and 
the number of errors. The task completion time in this task 
is defined as the time that elapsed since a new posture 
image was displayed on the screen till the time the 
participants completed the correct robotic posture. 
Completion time was measured automatically by the 
software according to the user sensed gestured, with a 
manual measurement for backup. The error in this case is 
defined as performing a posture that is different from the 
posture displayed on the screen. If a participant fails to 
perform the correct posture, then he/she needs to correct 
themselves. The time it takes the participants to think and 
correct their postures is also taken into account as part of 
the task completion time. Since the harder posture set 
requires the participants to move both forelegs of the AIBO, 
the actions can be preformed either sequentially or 
simultaneously. In this case, we did not constrain the 
participants to any of the input styles, allowing them to 
gesture either sequentially or simultaneously, as long as 
they feel it is the fastest and most intuitive way to complete 
the postures.
# Para 668 1
Interaction Techniques
# Para 669 3
For this task, the function mapping for the Wiimote 
interface is presented in Figure 7 and the mapping for the 
keypad interface is presented in Figure 8.
# Para 672 5
For the gesture input technique, the participants directly 
adjust the position of the forelegs of the AIBO using their 
own arms. Compare to the navigation task, the gesture-to-
robot action mapping in this case has an almost prefect 
degree of integration, and a high degree of compatibility [4].
# Para 677 1
For the keypad-to-robot action mapping, the four letter keys
# Para 678 2
Figure 9. Posture 1-6 is the easier posture group. Posture
7-12 is the harder posture group.
# Para 680 8
on the OQO control the right foreleg of the AIBO. The four 
number keys control the left foreleg of the AIBO. By 
pressing either X or 8, the AIBO will perform Posture 1 
(Figure 6) with either its right foreleg or left foreleg. By 
pressing either Z or 9, the AIBO will perform Posture 2. By 
pressing either A or 6, the AIBO will perform Posture 3. By 
pressing either Q or 3, the AIBO will perform Posture 4 
(Figure 6).
# Para 688 2
The Data collected from this task was analyzed using a 2 x 
2 within-subjects ANOVA for the following two factors:
# Para 690 1
•	Technique: Wiimote/Nunchuk, Keypad
# Para 691 1
•	Posture: posture 1 to 12 (Figure 9).
# Para 692 1
RESULTS
# Para 693 1
Task 1 - Navigation
# Para 694 1
Task Completion Time
# Para 695 13
A 2 x 2 (Technique X Difficulty) ANOVA, with repeated 
measures on both factors, revealed no significant Technique 
X Difficulty interaction (F1,19 = 1.54, p = 0.23), which 
suggests that performance with the techniques is not 
substantially influenced by the difficulty level. There was a 
significant main effect for Technique, F1,19 = 12.19, p 
&lt;.001, indicating that overall task completion time for the 
Wiimote technique (M = 43.2s, SD = 6.9s) was 10% faster 
than for the keypad technique (M = 48.5 s SD = 6.7s) 
(Figure 10). As we expected, the main effect of Difficulty 
was significant, F1,19 = 115.61, p &lt; .001, with the mean 
jumping from M = 38.7s, SD = 4.6s for the easy trail to M = 
53.0s, SD = 8.1s for the hard trail.
# Para 708 1
Error
# Para 709 16
A two-way ANOVA was used to determine if there were 
differences on the number of errors (dependent variable) 
participants made using the Wiimote and keypad techniques 
when performed the navigation task under different 
difficulty levels. The result of the ANOVA showed no 
significant Technique X Difficulty interaction (F1,19 = 0.03, 
p = .87), which suggests that the number of errors made 
using different techniques is not significantly influenced by 
the difficulty level. There was a significant main effect for 
Technique, F1,19 = 9.81, p &lt; .01, indicating the errors that 
participants made using the Wiimote technique (M = 0.35, 
SD = 0.4) is 43% less than using the keypad technique (M = 
0.83, SD = 0.6). The result also showed a marginally 
significant main effect for Difficulty (F1,19 = 3.96, p = .06), 
with mean varying from M = 0.43, SD = 0.4 for the easy 
trail to M = 0.75, SD = 0.6 for the hard trail.
# Para 725 1
Figure 10. Mean Task Completion Time for Navigation Task.
# Para 726 2
Figure 7. Arm posture input. These postures correspond to
the four AIBO postures showed in Figure 6.
# Para 728 1
Figure 8. Key-Posture Mapping.
# Para 729 1
127
# Para 730 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 731 1
Task 2 – Posture
# Para 732 1
Task Completion Time
# Para 733 5
A 2 x 12 (Technique X Posture) ANOVA on the task 
completion time for the posture task showed a significant 
Technique X Posture interaction effect (F11,209 = 8.43, p &lt; 
.001), which means that the Technique effect varies with 
Posture or vice versa.
# Para 738 11
On the average, there was a significant effect for Technique 
(F1,19 = 67.37, p &lt; .001), with mean times reducing from 
2.2s (SD = 0.4s) with keypad, to 1.5s (SD = 0.3s) with 
Wiimote/Nunchuk; On the average, a 32% reduction in task 
completion time between the two conditions. On the 
average, pairwise comparisons showed that there was a 
significant difference (p &lt; .05) between the techniques for 
posture 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, and 10. But, there was on significant 
difference for the other postures. (Figure 11) Also, on the 
average, the test showed a significant effect for Posture 
(F11,209 = 27.77, p &lt; .001).
# Para 749 2
Figure 11. Pairwise comparisons of the mean task completion 
time for each interaction technique according to posture.
# Para 751 1
Error
# Para 752 6
For the keypad interface, participants had made 1.5 (SD = 
1.2) errors on average for both difficulty levels. However, 
none of the participants had made any errors using the 
Wiimote/Nunchuk interface. As anticipated, a paired t-test 
showed a significant difference (t19 = 7.44, p &lt; .001) 
between the techniques.
# Para 758 1
DISCUSSION
# Para 759 7
The results presented in the previous section point to the 
Wiimote and the Wiimote/Nunchuk interfaces 
outperforming the keypad interface in terms of task 
completion time in both the robotic navigation and the 
robotic posture tasks. The differences between the 
interfaces, although statically significant, are a little 
underwhelming in their magnitude.
# Para 766 8
When attempting to explain this for the navigation task, we 
should consider that both interaction techniques use a set of 
abstract key and gesture combinations to represent specific 
robot movements. Since none of the participants have prior 
experience with these input methods, they have to learn and 
memorize the mappings of both techniques in order to 
navigate the AIBO. This abstract mapping between the user 
interface and the robot action added an extra layer of
# Para 774 8
cognitive load for the participants to process during the 
experiment. Although pressing buttons should not be slower 
than performing gestures, the study showed that the 
participants finished the obstacle course quicker with 
gesture input than with button input. We believe that 
although both interfaces require the participants to think 
about the abstract mapping before carrying out any actions, 
the Wiimote interface provides a slight advantage.
# Para 782 15
When using the Wiimote, participants do not need to focus 
on their hands while performing a posture. They are 
naturally aware of the spatial location of their hands. For 
the keypad interface, we observed that the participants have 
to constantly shift their attention back and forth between the 
keypad and the AIBO to look for the buttons they want to 
press and to confirm if they triggered the intended action. 
The consequences of shifting attention constantly between 
the interface and the AIBO may result in action overshoot 
(for example, overturning a corner) and can break the 
continuity of the task when participants have to stop the 
AIBO before they decide which action to take for the next 
step. This practical separation of action and perception 
spaces [23] is perhaps the reason for the slower task 
completion time when using the keypad.
# Para 797 7
Another possible reason for the faster task completion time 
when using the Wiimote/Nunchuk in the navigation task 
may be the zoomorphic rein-like mapping we used. While 
the mapping offered in this condition is not ideal (see our 
previous discussion of its degrees of integration and 
compatibility) the mapping does afford a simple, and arguably 
intuitive interaction metaphor.
# Para 804 14
Although the study results indicate that gesture input is 
faster for the navigation task, we are not suggesting it 
would always be a better solution than button input for this 
type of tasks. As we mentioned earlier in the pilot study 
section, the keypad mapping that we used was arguably not 
the most intuitive mapping we can come up with. A “W, A, 
S, D” key configuration would probably be more intuitive 
to use since it requires less key combinations and is a 
commonly used mapping in computer games for 
navigational tasks. However, we believe that our results 
demonstrate that when participants are limited to use 
asymmetric two-hand interaction techniques to control a 
robot, gesture input tends to be more intuitive to use than 
button input.
# Para 818 8
For the navigation tasks we did not expect that there would 
be a significant difference between the numbers of errors 
participants made using the different techniques. However, 
the data showed the opposite. Participants made 43% more 
errors with the keypad interface than with the Wiimote 
interface. Many participants felt that this was due to the 
small key size and the less intuitive mapping between 
buttons and robot actions.
# Para 826 6
For the posture tasks, we can see that on average there was 
a significant difference in task completion time between the 
postures that required two arms movement and the ones that 
only required one arm movement. By observation, we 
found that when the participants were using the 
Wiimote/Nunchuk interface, they were extremely engaged
# Para 832 1
128
# Para 833 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 834 8
and focused on the computer screen that displayed the 
posture images. However, when the participants used the 
keypad interface, they often looked at the computer screen 
first, and then focus on the keypad to find the right button 
to press. This attention shifting problem slowed down the 
participants’ task completion time and can again be 
associated with the separation between action and 
perception space created by the keypad.
# Para 842 7
Most participants felt they were simply mimicking the 
postures on the computer screen when using the 
Wiimote/Nunchuk interface, but they felt the keypad 
interface required them to “act”. Following, we believe that 
the intuitiveness of gesture input had definitely reduced the 
cognitive load of associating user inputs with zoomorphic 
robotic actions.
# Para 849 9
In addition, gesture input tends to support simultaneous 
input compared to button input. As one of the participants 
commented, “I could do both hands (both arm movements) 
at the same time without a lot of logical thinking (with the 
Wiimote/Nunchuk interface), where with the keyboard I 
had to press one (button) and the other (button) if I was 
doing two hand movements at the same time. Although they 
would be in succession, they would not be at the same 
time.”
# Para 858 9
It is worth to point out that even though posture 1 and 2 
only required single arm movements, there was a 
significant difference between the task completion times of 
both techniques. In our opinion, we think this is perhaps 
due to the participants not being fully trained at the 
beginning of the study. Thus, they tend to make more 
mistakes with the first few postures. This may also imply 
that the Wiimote/Nunchuk interface was easier to learn 
compared to the keypad interface and can be utilized faster.
# Para 867 1
Subjective Ratings
# Para 868 4
We also asked the participants to rate the intuitiveness of 
both input techniques and indicate their preferred 
techniques for both tasks. Figure 12 and 13 shows the 
results of participants’ ratings.
# Para 872 10
After the study, we asked the participants who preferred to 
use the keypad for the navigation task about their subjective 
reasoning. All of them responded that they are more 
familiar with the keypad interface because of related 
computer game experiences. However, their performance 
indicates they completed the navigation task when using the 
keypad slower than when using the Wiimote interface. One 
of the participants commented, “I have to think harder when 
I use the keyboard, and this kind of mental overhead 
coupled with the lag time just makes it feel harder.”
# Para 882 9
For the participants who preferred to use the keypad for the 
posture task, their reasoning was that they can easily 
memorize the key-action mapping since there were only 
four postures for each arm and the buttons associated with 
both arms are symmetrical on the keypad layout. As one of 
the participants stated, “With so few postures available, the 
keyboard was just as easy as the Wiimote.” We agree with 
this participant’s comment. We believe that if we provided 
extensive training to all of the participants using the keypad
# Para 891 7
interface, they would eventually outperform the 
Wiimote/Nunchuk interface in terms of task completion 
time. However, we think that the gestural TUI control 
method would prevail if we increase the number of degrees-
of-freedom and postures to an amount that participants 
cannot easily memorize, or if we deal with an interaction 
task that cannot afford intensive training.
# Para 898 4
During the experiment, many participants asked whether 
the Wiimote interface supports gradual motion sensing. The 
consensus indicates that people expect gesture interface to 
be capable of sensing and reacting to gradual changes of
# Para 902 3
Figure 12. Mean ratings on post-study questionnaire. 
The rating scale ranges from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 
(strongly agree).
# Para 905 2
Figure 13. Users’ preference for each interaction 
technique
# Para 907 1
129
# Para 908 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 909 4
body motion. However, in order to maintain the fairness of 
the comparative study, we implemented the Wiimote 
interface as a state machine to match the limitation of the 
keypad interface.
# Para 913 1
CONCLUSION
# Para 914 20
We have introduced a new interaction technique which 
utilizes simple generic 3D TUIs (based on the Nintendo 
Wiimote and Nunchuk) to capture human arm and hand 
gesture input for human-robot interaction. To evaluate this 
technique, we have conducted a comparative user study 
which compares the Wiimote/Nunchuk interface with a 
traditional input device – keypad in terms of speed and 
accuracy. We employed two tasks for our study: the posture 
task utilized a direct mapping between the TUIs and the 
robot, and the navigation task utilized a less direct, more 
abstract mapping. The result of our experiment provides 
some evidence that a gesture input scheme with tangible 
user interfaces can outperform a button-pressing input 
design for certain HRI tasks. We have observed a 
significant decrease in both task completion time and the 
number of mistakes participants made for both the 
navigation and posture tasks. The follow-up questionnaire 
revealed that a significant majority of the participants chose 
the Wiimote/Nunchuk interface as their preferred technique 
for controlling an AIBO in both tasks.
# Para 934 8
In future work, we hope to improve the Wiimote/Nunchuk 
interaction technique to analyze continuous human arm and 
hand gestures to extend our abilities in controlling 
anthropomorphic and zoomorphic robots. We believe more 
elaborate TUIs would afford intuitive mapping for much 
more delicate HRI tasks. We also intend to explore the 
possibility of mapping a large set of TUIs as physical 
manipulators for a large group of robots.
# Para 942 1
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
# Para 943 5
Our research was supported by NSERC as well as internal 
University of Calgary grants. We are very grateful for the help 
and support provided by Dr. Tak Shing Fung, Dr. Edward Tse, 
Mark Hancock, James Young and other members of the 
uTouch group and the Interactions Lab.
# Para 948 1
REFERENCES
# Para 949 2
1. ADXL330, Analog Devices. http://www.analog.com/ 
UploadedFiles/Data_Sheets/ADXL330.pdf
# Para 951 2
2. Balakrishnan, R., Hinckley, K. Symmetric bimanual interaction. 
In Proc. CHI 2000, ACM Press (2000), 33-40.
# Para 953 3
3. Baudel, T., Baudouin-Lafon, M. Charade: Remote Control of 
Objects Using Free-Hand Gestures. Communication of the. ACM, 
vol. 36, (1993), no. 7, pp. 28-35.
# Para 956 3
4. Beaudouin-Lafon, M. Instrumental interaction: an interaction 
model for designing post-WIMP user interfaces. In Proc. CHI 
2000, ACM Press (2000), 446-453
# Para 959 4
5. Bluethmann, W., Ambrose, R., Diftler, M., Askew, S., Huber, E., 
Goza, M., Rehnmark, F., Lovchik, C. and Magruder, D. 
Robonaut: A robot designed to work with humans in space. 
Autonomous Robots (2003), 14(2-3): 179-197.
# Para 963 2
6. Dourish, P. Where the Action is: The Foundations of Embodied 
Interaction. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2001.
# Para 965 2
7. Drury, J. L., Scholtz, J., Yanco, H.A. Awareness in human-robot 
interactions. In Proc. IEEE SMC 2003.
# Para 967 3
8. Faisal, S., Cairns, P., and Craft, B. Infoviz experience 
enhancement through mediated interaction. In Proc. ICMI 2005, 
ACM Press (2005), 3-9.
# Para 970 3
9. Fitzmaurice, G.W., Buxton, W. An empirical evaluation of 
graspable user interfaces: towards specialized, space-multiplexed 
input. In Proc. CHI 1997, ACM Press (1997), 43-50.
# Para 973 3
10. Fitzmaurice, G.W., Ishii, H., and Buxton, W. Bricks: Laying the 
Foundations for Graspable User Interfaces. In Proc. CHI 1995, 
ACM Press (1995), 317-324.
# Para 976 2
11. Goodrich, M., and Olsen, D. Seven principles of efficient human 
robot interaction. In Proc. IEEE SMC 2003, 3943–3948.
# Para 978 4
12. Hasanuzzaman, Md., Zhang, T., Ampornaramveth, V., Kiatisevi, 
P., Shirai, Y., and Ueno, H. Gesture Based Human-Robot 
Interaction Using a Frame Based Software Platform. In Proc. 
IEEE SMC 2004, 2883-2888.
# Para 982 3
13. Ishii, H. and Ullmer, B. Tangible Bits: Towards Seamless 
Interfaces between People, Bits and Atoms. In Proc. CHI 1997, 
ACM Press (1997), 234-241.
# Para 985 3
14. Kazerooni, H. Human-Robot Interaction via the Transfer of 
Power and Information Signals. IEEE Trans. on System and 
Cybernetics (1990) Vol.20, No. 2, 450-463.
# Para 988 2
15. Kortenkamp, D., Huber, E., and Bonasso, R. Recognizing and 
interpreting gestures on a mobile robot. In Proc. AAAI 1996.
# Para 990 2
16. Managed Library for Nintendo’s Wiimote, http://blogs. 
sdn.com/coding4fun/archive/2007/03/14/1879033.aspx
# Para 992 2
17. McNeill, D. Hand and Mind: What Gestures Reveal about 
Thought. University of Chicago Press (1992).
# Para 994 2
18. Messing, L., Campbell, R. Gesture, speech, and sign. New York: 
Oxford University Press (1999), 227.
# Para 996 2
19. Norman, D.A. The Psychology of Everyday Things. BasicBooks, 
1988.
# Para 998 3
20. Quigely, M., Goodrich, M., Beard, R. Semi-Autonomous 
Human-UAV Interfaces for Fixed-Wing Mini-UAVs. In Proc. 
IROS 2004.
# Para 1001 3
21. Raffle, H., Parkes, A. Ishii, H. Topobo: A Constructive Assembly 
System with Kinetic Memory. In Proc. CHI 2004, ACM Press 
(2004), 647 – 654.
# Para 1004 4
22. Richer, J., Drury J.L. A Video Game-Based Framework for 
Analyzing Human-Robot Interaction: Characterizing Interface 
Design in Real-Time Interactive Multimedia Applications. In 
Proc. HRI 2006, ACM Press (2006), 266-273.
# Para 1008 3
23. Sharlin, E., Watson, B.A., Kitamura, Y., Kishino, F. and 
Itoh, Y. On Tangible User Interfaces, Humans and Spatiality. 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, Springer-Verlag (2004).
# Para 1011 2
24. Sturman, D., Zeltzer, D. A Survey of Glove-Based Input. IEEE 
CG&amp;A (1994), Vol. 14, No. 1, 30-39.
# Para 1013 1
25. Tekkotsu framework, http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~tekkotsu/
# Para 1014 2
26. Wiimote Motion Analysis, 
http://www.wiili.org/index.php/Motion_analysis
# Para 1016 2
27. Wiimote Motion Sensor, 
http://www.wiili.org/index.php/Wiimote#Motion_Sensor
# Para 1018 4
28. Yanco, H.A., Drury, J.L. and Scholtz, J. Beyond Usability 
Evaluation: Analysis of Human-Robot Interaction at a Major 
Robotics Competition. Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 
(2004), Vol 19, Numbers 1 and 2, pp. 117-149.
# Para 1022 2
29. Yanco, H.A., Drury, J. Classifying Human-Robot Interaction: An 
Updated Taxonomy. In Proc. IEEE SMC 2004
# Para 1024 1
130
