<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<algorithm name="SectLabel" version="090625" confidence="0.000000">
<table confidence="0.551202">
Mobile Networks and Applications 8, 209–221, 2003 © 2003 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The Netherlands
</table>
<title confidence="0.7874905">
A Unified Approach for Improving QoS and Provider Revenue in
3G Mobile Networks
</title>
<equation confidence="0.1271405">
CHRISTOPH LINDEMANN *, MARCO LOHMANN and AXEL THÜMMLER
University of Dortmund, Department of Computer Science, August-Schmidt-Str. 12, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.937320888888889">
Abstract. In this paper, we introduce a unified approach for the adaptive control of 3G mobile networks in order to improve both quality
of service (QoS) for mobile subscribers and to increase revenue for service providers. The introduced approach constantly monitors QoS
measures as packet loss probability and the current number of active mobile users during operation of the network. Based on the values
of the QoS measures just observed, the system parameters of the admission controller and packet scheduler are controlled by the adaptive
performance management entity. Considering UMTS, we present performance curves showing that handover failure probability is improved
by more than one order of magnitude. Moreover, the packet loss probability can be effectively regulated to a predefined level and provider
revenue is significantly increased for all pricing policies.
Keywords: performance evaluation of next generation mobile systems, Quality of Service in mobile systems, admission control in mobile
system, pricing and revenue optimization
</bodyText>
<sectionHeader confidence="0.980939">
1. Introduction
</sectionHeader>
<bodyText confidence="0.996582318584071">
The third generation (3G) of mobile networks is expected
to complete the worldwide globalization process of mobile
communication. Since different parts of the worlds empha-
size different issues, the global term 3G has regional syn-
onyms: In the US and Japan, 3G often carries the name In-
ternational Mobile Telephony 2000 (IMT2000). In Europe,
3G has become Universal Mobile Telecommunications Sys-
tem (UMTS) following the ETSI perspective. The European
industrial players have created the 3rd Generation Partner-
ship Project (3GPP) [1] for the standardization of UMTS.
3G mobile networks provide the foundation for new services
with high-rate data not provided by current second generation
systems [26]. While the standardization of 3G is still ongo-
ing the discussion of technical issues beyond 3G has already
started [23,28]. Recently, Aretz et al. reported a vision for
the future of wireless communication systems beyond 3G that
consists of a combination of several optimized access systems
on a common IP-based medium access and core network plat-
form [5].
Charging and pricing are essential issues for network op-
erations of 3G mobile networks. A primary target of differen-
tiated pricing of Internet services is the prevention of system
overload and an optimal resource usage according to differ-
ent daytimes and different traffic intensities [12]. Among the
proposed pricing proposals, flat-rate pricing [11] is the most
common mode of payment today for bandwidth services.
Flat-rate pricing is popular because of its minimal account-
ing overhead. A flat-rate encourages usage but does not offer
any motivation for users to adjust their demand. Dynamic
pricing models that take the state of the network into account
in the price determination have been proposed as being more
* Corresponding author.
responsive. Usage-based pricing regulates usage by impos-
ing a fee based on the amount of data actually sent, whereas
congestion-sensitive pricing uses a fee based on the current
state of congestion in the network. Thus, a unified approach
considering both dynamic pricing and controlling quality of
service (i.e., performance management) provides an effective
tool for the operation of 3G mobile networks. However, in
previous work [8,13,19,21,25] the improvement of Quality of
Service (QoS) in 3G mobile networks and the optimization
of mobile service provider revenue has been considered sepa-
rately.
The Quality of Service (QoS) concept and architecture for
UMTS networks specified in [2] provides means for shar-
ing radio resources among different groups of users accord-
ing to their individual QoS demands. Furthermore, the con-
cept of UMTS management and control functions such as
admission controller and resource manager is roughly out-
lined. Das et al. proposed a framework for QoS provisioning
for multimedia services in 3G wireless access networks [8].
They developed an integrated framework by combining var-
ious approaches for call admission control, channel reser-
vation, bandwidth degradation, and bandwidth compaction.
In [19], we introduced a framework for the adaptive control
of UMTS networks, which utilizes online monitoring of QoS
measures (e.g., handover failure and call blocking probabil-
ities) in order to adjust system parameters of the admission
controller and the packet scheduler. The presented approach
is based on a lookup table called the Performance Manage-
ment Information Base (P-MIB). Entries of the P-MIB have
to be determined using extensive off-line simulation experi-
ments to determine optimal parameter configuration for the
considered scenarios. Given the entries of the P-MIB, we
showed how to improve QoS for mobile users by periodi-
cally adjusting system parameters. The practical applicability
of this approach is limited if the P-MIB comprises many en-
210 C. LINDEMANN ET AL.
tries (i.e., many scenarios have to be considered) because of
the high computational effort for determining these entries by
simulation.
This paper introduces a unified approach for the adaptive
performance management for 3G mobile networks. As the
main result of the paper, the introduced approach is based on
a mathematical framework for the proposed update schemes
rather than a lookup table. As a consequence, the adaptive
control mechanism can be adjusted in an intuitive way and
optimal system parameter configuration can efficiently be de-
termined. We effectively utilize adaptive performance man-
agement for improving not only QoS for mobile users but
also increase revenue earned by service providers. As in [19],
controlled system parameters comprise queueing weights for
packet scheduling, a threshold value of the access queue for
admission of non real-time traffic, and a portion of the over-
all available bandwidth reserved for handover calls. Be-
yond [19], we propose a scheme for adjusting the queueing
weights for both improving QoS for higher priority users that
suffer from a high population of users with lower priority and
for increasing the revenue earned by the service provider. For
the analysis of the update strategy of the queuing weights, we
consider a usage-based and a usage-/throughput-based pric-
ing policy according to [11,12,21]. Furthermore, we intro-
duce a hybrid pricing policy combining the notion of flat-
rate and a usage-based pricing according to current policies
of GSM networks. Performance curves derived by simulation
evidently illustrate the gain of the unified approach for adap-
tive performance management. In fact, for UMTS networks,
simulation results show that handover failure probability can
be improved by more than one order of magnitude. Moreover,
packet loss probability can be effectively regulated to a prede-
fined level and the provider revenue is significantly increased
for all considered pricing policies.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the
unified approach for adaptive performance management and
describes its embedding in the system architecture of 3G mo-
bile networks. Section 3 introduces strategies for controlling
the parameters of an admission controller in order to improve
QoS. Section 4 describes the parameter control of a packet
scheduler for the combined improvement of both QoS and
provider revenue. In section 5, we present simulation results
that illustrate the benefit of employing the proposed approach
for adaptive performance management. Finally, concluding
remarks are given
</bodyText>
<sectionHeader confidence="0.5097895">
2. Adaptive performance management for 3G mobile
networks
</sectionHeader>
<bodyText confidence="0.982008594594594">
2.1. Description of the unified approach
This section introduces the unified approach for regularly ad-
justing system parameters to changing traffic load, packet ar-
rival pattern or population of users, etc. We consider a cellular
mobile network in which a different transceiver station serves
each cell. The purpose of the transceiver station is the modu-
Figure 1. System architecture for adaptive performance management.
lation of carrier frequencies and demodulation of signals. Fur-
thermore, a base station controller (BSC) is considered that is
responsible for a cluster of cells, i.e., several transceiver sta-
tions. The BSC manages the radio resources, i.e., schedules
data packets, and controls handovers inside the cell cluster as
well as handovers towards and from neighboring cell clusters.
To improve QoS for mobile users as well as to increase
revenue earned by service providers, an entity for Adaptive
Performance Management (APM) is included in a BSC. Fur-
thermore, a BSC has to be extended by an online performance
monitoring component that derives QoS measures in a cer-
tain time window (e.g., handover failure probabilities of mo-
bile users or packet loss probabilities). These QoS measures
form a system pattern that is submitted in fixed time intervals
(i.e., a control period) to the APM entity, which subsequently
updates corresponding system parameters (i.e., parameters of
traffic controlling components like the admission controller
and packet scheduler). Thus, the proposed approach closes
the loop between network operation and network control. Fig-
ure 1 shows the system architecture for performance manage-
ment embedded in a BSC.
2.1.1. Online performance monitoring
System parameters of a BSC can be effectively updated by
monitoring QoS measures, which are immediately affected by
these parameters. A current value for a QoS measure is deter-
mined online based on a set of relevant events corresponding
to this QoS measure (e.g., packet arrivals are relevant events
for computing packet loss probabilities). The online monitor-
ing of QoS measures is done by a sliding window technique
as introduced in [19]. The width of the sliding window over
time depends on the number of relevant events that are oc-
curred according to a QoS measure. Upon arrival of a new
relevant event the sliding window moves in time. At the end
of a control period the QoS measures are derived for each
sliding window (e.g., packet loss probability can be derived
from number of lost packets divided by number of all packet
arrivals in the sliding window). These QoS measures and the
number of events occurred in the last control period form the
system pattern that is transferred to the adaptive performance
management entity (see figure 1).
IMPROVING QoS AND PROVIDER REVENUE IN 3G MOBILE NETWORKS 211
Note that an accurate online monitoring of QoS measures
requires a specific width for the sliding window. A certain
number of events representing the history of the QoS mea-
sure have to be considered to get an expressive measure. On
the other hand considering a big sliding window prevents the
APM entity from fast reaction on changing traffic conditions.
A bigger sliding window contains more history and, thus,
more events have to be collected to cause a significant change
in the online monitored QoS measure. This tradeoff between
accurate online monitoring and fast reaction of the APM to
changing traffic conditions has to be studied carefully in sev-
eral experiments to get the optimal width of the sliding win-
dow for each QoS measure.
2.1.2. Adaptive performance management
Whenever a system pattern S = { (P1, n 1) , ... , (Pm, nm )},
consisting of online monitored QoS measures P1, ... , Pm
and the numbers of relevant events n1, ... , nm occurred in
the last control period is transmitted to the APM an up-
date of the system parameters can be performed. In gen-
eral, an update of a system parameter σ is made according
to a function f depending on a subset of the QoS measures
P1, ... , Pm and the previous value σ(old) of the system pa-
rameter. Let Pτ(1), ... , Pτ(k), k S m, be the QoS measures
corresponding to system parameter σ, then the update is made
if a certain minimum number n(σ) of relevant events occurred
in the last control period. That is
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.7803055">
σ(new) = f (Pτ (1), ... , Pτ(k), σ
if min{nτ(1), ... , nτ(k)} n(σ).11 (1
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.9968021875">
We classify update functions in relative functions, that per-
form a parameter update relative to the old parameter value
and absolute functions that set the new parameter value in-
dependent of the old value, i.e., f is independent of σ(old)
in (1). With relative update functions strong fluctuations of
the corresponding system parameter in one update step can be
avoided. In section 3, we study a special class of relative up-
date functions in order to set the parameters of an admission
controller. Furthermore, we develop in section 4 an absolute
update function for adjusting the weights of a weighted fair
queueing packet scheduler.
2.2. Economics and pricing policies in 3G mobile networks
There are multiple requirements, which should be fulfilled
for any viable pricing mechanism in multi-service class data
communication networks [12]. A primary target of differen-
tiated pricing of Internet services is the prevention of system
overload and an optimal resource usage according to differ-
ent daytimes and different traffic intensities. Furthermore, the
pricing scheme should be implemented in a completely de-
centralized manner and there should be multiple priorities in
order to take into account the different QoS required by dif-
ferent applications and users.
In general, pricing policies can be partitioned into usage-
based (pay-as-you-go) pricing, flat-rate (all-you-can-eat)
pricing, and dynamic pricing. In usage-based pricing poli-
cies a user is charged according to a connection time or traffic
volume. Whereas connection based calls (e.g., in GSM) are
charged by connection time, packet-switched services (e.g., in
UMTS) are charging the transferred data volume. Dynamic
pricing models take into account the state of the mobile ra-
dio network for determining the current price of a service.
Congestion-sensitive pricing as a particular dynamic pricing
model has been shown to be more responsive. MacKie-Mason
and Varian introduced the concept of congestion-sensitive
pricing in their smart market scheme [21]. Under this model,
the actual price for each packet is determined based on the
current state of network congestion. In [25], Rao and Petersen
discussed the optimal pricing of priority services. Analo-
gously to the smart market approach, Gupta et al. presented
a pricing scheme that uses priorities on the packet-level [13].
They proposed to differentiate Internet traffic according to de-
lay and loss requirements.
For the analysis of the update strategy of the queuing
weights, we consider in section 4 a usage-based and a usage-/
throughput-based pricing policy according to [11,12,21]. Fur-
thermore, we introduce a hybrid pricing policy combining the
notion of flat-rate and a usage-based pricing according to cur-
rent policies of GSM networks
</bodyText>
<listItem confidence="0.3614335">
3. Strategies for improving Quality of Service
3.1. Admission controller
</listItem>
<bodyText confidence="0.987761444444445">
The proposed approach distinguishes three different types
of services: circuit-switched services, packet-switched real-
time services (RT), and packet-switched non real-time ser-
vices (NRT). Typically, circuit-switched services are voice
calls from a GSM mobile station. As proposed by 3GPP, RT
services belong to the conversational and streaming classes
and NRT services fall into the interactive and background
classes [2]. The bandwidth available in a cell must be shared
by calls of these different service classes and the different ser-
vice requirements have to be met. Before a mobile session
begins, the user needs to specify its traffic characteristics and
desired performance requirements by a QoS profile. Then, an
admission controller decides to accept or reject the users re-
quest based on the QoS profile and the current network state
as, e.g., given by queueing length. The purpose of the admis-
sion controller is to guarantee the QoS requirements of the
user who requested admission while not violating the QoS
profiles of already admitted users. The call admission criteria
will be different for each service class. The QoS profile for
RT sessions specifies a guaranteed bandwidth to be provided
for the application in order to meet its QoS requirements. If
the network cannot satisfy the desired bandwidth, the corre-
sponding admission request is rejected.
Data packets arriving at the BSC are queued until they are
scheduled to be transmitted over the radio link. For NRT ses-
sions, we consider an admission controller taking into account
free buffer space in the NRT queue [8]. In order to prevent
buffer overflow once a call is admitted, the current queue-
ing length is set against certain buffer availability threshold
212 C. LINDEMANN ET AL.
of the capacity, denoted by η. The admission criteria for
voice and RT handovers are the same as for new voice calls
and RT sessions except that additional handover bandwidth
can be utilized. The analysis of several admission control
schemes for cellular systems presented in [24] showed that
the simple reservation scheme (i.e., reserving bandwidth for
handover calls) performs remarkably well. For simple cellu-
lar networks, the optimal amount of bandwidth reserved for
handover calls can be determined by analytical models [14].
In the model presented here, we denote with bh the portion
of the overall bandwidth that is exclusively reserved for han-
dover calls from neighboring cells. The considered admission
controller does not prioritize NRT handovers over new NRT
sessions. Further details of the admission controller are given
in [19].
3.2. Adjusting the admission controllerfor QoS improvement
In this section, we show how to utilize equation (1) for setting
the parameters η and bh of the admission controller in order to
reduce packet loss probability and handover failure probabil-
ity. For updating the system parameters, we split the general
function introduced in section 2.1 into separate functions each
depending only on one QoS measure. Let P1, ... , Pk be the
QoS measures corresponding to a system parameter σ. Then,
equation (1) can be simplified to
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.997505333333333">
σ(new) = f1 (P1) + ··· + fk(Pk) σ (old)
k
L\σ(new)\R. (2
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.9979119">
The interpretation of (2) is the following. Each update
function fi describes the influence that the QoS measure
Pi should have on the system parameter σ. Subsequently,
the overall update is performed by computing the arithmetic
mean of the functions fi multiplied with the old value of the
system parameter. Note that the value σ(new) must be trun-
cated at a certain lower bound L and an upper bound R in
order to guarantee that the computation of σ(new) results in a
valid value of the system parameter. As basic update function
we consider a logarithmic linear function of the form
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.777777">
fi (Pi) = mi log Pi + bi. (3
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.999903304347826">
The reason for this choice is that we want to consider QoS
measures like loss probabilities and failure/blocking proba-
bilities, which are in the range of 10−5 to 1. Therefore, a
logarithmic shape is more suitable. In previous work [19],
we have studied update schemes of system parameters of
an admission controller and a packet scheduler based on a
lookup table. In order to determine the optimal entries of this
lookup table extensive off-line simulation experiments have
been conducted. Applying regression statistics to the entries
of this lookup table shows that these entries are well repre-
sented by functions with logarithmic shape. Thus, besides the
motivation of the update functions given here, their choice
is to a large extend originated from regression statistics con-
ducted in earlier work. The strength of the influence of fi on
σ(new) can be adjusted with the gradient mi. The parameter bi
can be determined by the following interpretation: suppose
the desired level of the QoS measure Pi is βi (e.g., the de-
sired packet loss probability is 0.001). That is, if the online
measured value of Pi is βi the system parameter σ should
not be changed in the update step from the point of view of
measure Pi. Therefore, we chose fi (βi) = 1 and from this
relation we get bi = 1 − mi log βi. Inserting in equation (3)
results in the final form of the update function
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.9720185">
fi (Pi) = mi log Pi + 1. (4)
βi
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.997998111111111">
For ease of notation, we abbreviate the QoS measures han-
dover failure probability and new call/session blocking prob-
ability corresponding to voice calls and RT sessions by HFP
and CBP, respectively. The probability of a packet loss due
to buffer overflow in the NRT queue is abbreviated by PLP.
The update strategy according to equations (2)–(4) is justified
by its intuitive understanding and the performance results pre-
sented in section 5. The suitability of update functions other
than (2)–(4), is subject for further study and out of the scope
of this paper.
3.2.1. Update of non real-time queue threshold
Recall that a system parameter update is performed each time
a system pattern arrives at the APM entity and the minimum
number of relevant events corresponding to this system para-
meter is reached. Determining the update for the system para-
meter η, i.e., determining η(new), is performed corresponding
to the old value η(old) and the actually observed QoS measure
PLP. That is
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.988345">
η(new) = f (PLP) · η(old), 0.001 \ η(new) \ 1. (5
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.95105719047619">
The truncation of η(new) at the lower bound guaranties that
the value does not accumulate near zero for long periods of
low traffic load. The minimum number of relevant events re-
quired for an update of η is counted in data volume rather than
in packet arrivals (in the experiments this number is 5 MB).
The setting of the gradient m of the corresponding update
function is derived from a couple of experiments for different
values of the gradient. We found m = −0.02 to be suitable.
Choosing a suitable value for the gradient is a similar tradeoff
as explained for the sliding window size. A large gradient re-
sults in a fast update of the system parameter in a few number
of update steps, but also introduces higher fluctuations of the
system parameter over time. We demonstrate the speed of the
parameter adjustment in an experiment in section 5. Further-
more, several experiments for different desired loss values β
are presented.
3.2.2. Update offraction of bandwidth reserved for handover
The update for the system parameter bh, i.e., determining
b(new)
h, is performed based on the old value and the actually
observed QoS measures HFP and CBP. That is
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.93299175">
b(new) h= f1(HFP) +2 f2(CBP) ·b(old)
h ,
0.001 \ b(new) h\ R. (6)
IMPROVING QoS AND PROVIDER REVENUE IN 3G MOBILE NETWORKS 213
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.953223906976744">
The value b(hnew) is truncated at a lower bound of 0.1%
and a certain upper bound R which is a fraction of the over-
all bandwidth available (in the experiments we fix R = 0.7).
The truncation at the lower bound is for the same reason as
explained above. In fact, for computing b(hnew) two QoS mea-
sures corresponding to the actually observed HFP and CBP
are taken into account. A high HFP should increase bhnew)
but this obviously also increases the CBP because less band-
width is available for new voice calls and RT sessions. There-
fore, the HFP and the CBP influence the handover bandwidth
b(hnew). In fact, m1 = −m2 holds in the update functions f1
and f2. From a couple of experiments for different gradients,
we found m1 = 0.08 to be suitable. A common assumption
in cellular networks is to prioritize handover calls over new
calls. Therefore, the desired handover failure level β1 should
be smaller than the desired call blocking level β2. According
to these values the handover bandwidth is slightly increased,
if HFP is equal to CBP.
With the presented strategy the parameters of the update
functions can be chosen in an intuitive way and optimal para-
meter configuration can efficiently be determined. This is the
major advantage over the approach based on a Performance
Management Information Base introduced in [19] which re-
quires extensive off-line simulation experiments.
4. Strategies for improving both QoS and provider
revenue
4.1. Packet scheduler
At a BSC responsible for a cluster of cells, data packets from
various connections arrive and are queued until bandwidth
for transmission is available. In order to distinguish differ-
ent priorities for NRT traffic corresponding to the traffic han-
dling priority defined by 3GPP [2], scheduling algorithms
like Weighted Round Robin (WRR), Weighted Fair Queue-
ing (WFQ [9]) or Class Based Queueing (CBQ [10]) have to
be implemented. An overview of queueing issues for guar-
anteed performance services can be found in [27]. In WFQ,
the weights control the amount of traffic a source may de-
liver relative to other active sources during some period of
time. From the scheduling algorithm’s point of view, a source
is considered to be active, if it has data queued in the NRT
queue. Let B be the overall bandwidth available for NRT
sessions at time t. For an active source i with weight wi, the
bandwidth Bi that is allocated to this transfer at time t is given
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.854544666666667">
by
Bi = wi B.(7)
Ej w j
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.99156172">
In (7) the sum is taken over all active NRT sources j. A class
based version of WFQ serves packets of each priority class
according to the weights rather than every active source.
4.2. Adjusting the packet schedulerfor QoS and revenue
improvement
This section utilizes the proposed approach for the adaptive
control of the weights of a weighted fair queueing packet
scheduler in order to improve QoS as well as to increase the
revenue. The strategy for adjusting the weights combined
with the introduction of several pricing policies constitutes
a further contribution of the paper. Recall that the revenue
earned by a mobile service provider is determined by the
monthly payment of mobile users as well as by the additional
usage-based pricing after the monthly amount of data volume
is consumed. Note, that the monthly subscription rate is only
relevant for monthly revenue calculations. In this section, we
consider the revenue improvement in a certain small time pe-
riod regardless the monthly subscription rates. In section 5,
we briefly discuss monthly revenue calculation. Let P denote
the number of different priority classes, i.e., weights of the
weighted fair queueing scheduler. Define by bi (t) the trans-
ferred data volume in time t of users of priority i and by ri (t)
the payment of users of priority i at time t, i.e., the user pays
for the transferred data volume. We distinguish a pure usage-
based and a usage-/throughput-based pricing policy
</bodyText>
<listItem confidence="0.947051333333333">
a) A user of priority i has a fixed payment pi per kbit during
his session, i.e., ri (t) = pi.
(b) The payment of a user of priority i consists of a fixed part
pi that is increased proportional to the additional through-
put ϕi (t) he received due to the update of the queueing
weights, i.e., ri (t) = pi ϕi (t
</listItem>
<bodyText confidence="0.859442333333333">
According to the proposed data volume based pricing with
respect to different priority classes the revenue function 4) (t)
is given by
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.999488">
4)(t) = �P ri (t)bi (t). (8)
i=1
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.975936733333333">
The revenue function of equation (8) is utilized in section 5
for evaluating the strategies for revenue improvement pre-
sented below.
4.2.1. Update of WFQ weights
Recall that packets of NRT users arriving at the BSC are first
queued until they are scheduled for transfer by a weighted
fair queueing discipline. Let wi wi+1, i = 1, ... , P − 1,
be the basic weights of the WFQ scheduler. The update of
the queueing weights, i.e., determining winew) is made ac-
cording to an absolute update function depending on the basic
weights wi and the current number of NRT sessions belong-
ing to priority i. Therefore, every system pattern that is trans-
mitted from the online monitoring component to the adaptive
performance management entity contains the current number
of active NRT sessions with priority i in the cell. For ease
of notation, the number of active non real-time sessions with
priority i is abbreviated by NRTi .
The idea behind the strategy for revenue improvement is
to shift the overall utilization of bandwidth for NRT traffic
214 C. LINDEMANN ET AL.
towards higher priority users, which pay more for the trans-
ferred data volume. Note that the update strategy should be
conservative in a way that the transfer of packets of low pri-
ority is not simply blocked if packets of higher priorities are
arriving, i.e., priority queueing. Assuming that the majority
of users will buy a cheaper low priority service class, priority
queueing will leave most users unsatisfied. Therefore, the up-
date strategy also considers the QoS aspect. The update strat-
egy concerning the queueing weights is developed according
to the following premises
</bodyText>
<listItem confidence="0.690957125">
i) If the number of active NRT users in the cell is the same
for each priority class, i.e., NRTi = NRTj, i =� j,
the weights wi(new) should be set according to the basic
weights wi for i = 1, ... , P.
(ii) Priority classes with low population of users compared
to other classes should be prioritized, i.e., the corre-
sponding weights should be increased.
(iii) The relative ordering of the weights should be preserved
</listItem>
<bodyText confidence="0.963577026315789">
in a strong way, i.e., winew) · (wi/wi+1) · wi+1) for i =
1,...,P−1.
Premise (i) constitutes the key of the update strategy. If all
priority classes have the same population of users the schedul-
ing should work as in the case without adaptive control of
the weights. The rationale behind premise (ii) is to priori-
tize users that are consuming less bandwidth (relative to their
weights) than users belonging to other classes, i.e., users of
low population should be made more independent from the
influence of user classes with higher population. This premise
constitutes the basic idea for QoS improvement and is demon-
strated by the following example that considers two priority
classes, i.e., a high and low priority class. In WFQ the avail-
able bandwidth is shared among all active users according to
their weights. That is, if the minority are high priority users,
the overall bandwidth consumed by these users will suffer
from a strong influence of low priority users that hold the
majority. Therefore, increasing the weights for high priority
users will result in a higher QoS for this user class. Updating
the weights according to this strategy will result in a schedul-
ing algorithm somewhere between a WFQ and a class based
queueing scheduler. In fact, the benefit of both is utilized: the
fair sharing of the bandwidth of WFQ and the higher band-
width guarantees for each priority class provided by a class
based queueing scheduler.
Preserving the relative ordering of the weights (i.e.,
premise (iii)) guarantees that QoS for higher priority users
and, therefore, the provider revenue can only be improved
due to the adaptive control of the weights. If the intention
of the update strategy is not primary on improving provider
revenue the weights can be also set in a weak relation, i.e.,
w(new)&amp;gt; w(new) This might be useful to increase QoS for
+1.g Q
users of low population independent of their priority class.
With the following algorithm the computation of the weights
w(new) WP can be performed iterative) in P −1 min-
W1 P p iteratively
imumcalculations. The iteration is given by
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.978735375">
w1ew) =w1 · (NRT1)−α, (9)
wi new) = min (wi−1 i· win1 ), wi · (NRTi)−α
i = 2,..., P. (10)
users on the queueing weights, an exponent
α
&amp;gt;, 0 is consid-
ered (e.g.,
α
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.919411">
1/2). It is easy to show that premises (i), (ii)
and (iii) hold for the weights set according to equations (9)
and (10). The iteration starts with setting
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.956243888888889">
w
h
ew)
according to
NRT1
and continues up to
w
Pn
ew
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.96980425">
Note that this is only one
possibility to set the new weights. Any other starting position
for the iteration is possible and results in a slightly different
update of the weights. Nevertheless, the algorithms work in
a similar way, and therefore, we consider only the iteration
of (9) and (10). If currently no users of priority i are in the
cell, i.e., NRTi = 0, the algorithm skips the setting of the
corresponding weight
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.995721666666667">
w
i
new
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.9024075">
and the next iteration step i + 1
is related to step i
</bodyText>
<listItem confidence="0.4058835">
1. Subsequently, these weights were set
</listItem>
<bodyText confidence="0.972181833333333">
to zero. For other scheduling disciplines like weighted round
robin or a class based queueing corresponding update strate-
gies can be deri
ved in a similar way.
tive throughput increase of priori
ty class i with the function
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.971092">
new) (w P · THRi 1 γ
i = .
(11)
wi
·THRP
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.893544">
In order to smooth the influence of the number of NRT
</bodyText>
<subsubsectionHeader confidence="0.902955">
4.2.2. Considering advanced pricing policies
</subsubsectionHeader>
<bodyText confidence="0.998299480769231">
In pricing policy (b) introduced above, users have to pay an
additional fee depending on the throughput improvement due
to the update of the queueing weights. This concept of pric-
ing indicates strong similarities to the congestion-sensitive
pricing of the smart market scheme [21], where the actual
price for each packet is determined based on the current state
of network congestion. Similarly, in our throughput-based
pricing policy the throughput of users is determined by their
willingness-to-pay additional costs (according to their choice
of priority class) for transmission of packets in a congested
network. The additional payment is justified because the
throughput for users of higher priority will be maintained,
even if more and more users of lower priority attend the cell,
i.e., the network is currently congested. We describe the rela-
In equation (11), THRi is the current throughput of class i de-
rived from the corresponding sliding window and 0 &amp;lt; γ &amp;lt; 1
is a scaling exponent (e.g., γ = 1/4) that has to be adjusted
by the service provider for appropriate revenue dimension-
ing. In order to guarantee that revenue will be only improved,
ϕi (t) has to be truncated, i.e., ϕi (t) &amp;gt; 1.
Next, we adjust the weights according to an advanced pric-
ing policy that adopts ideas, which have been successful in
existing GSM networks. In GSM networks, the pricing of
a provided service is as follows: the proposed service is of-
fered based on a monthly payment for a dedicated amount
IMPROVING QoS AND PROVIDER REVENUE IN 3G MOBILE NETWORKS 215
of call time. If a user has consumed this amount of time
before the end of the month, he has to pay for any further
use of this service based on a time-dependent accounting.
This idea can be generalized and extended towards packet-
switched services in 3G networks. Analogously, a user has
to pay a monthly charge for a dedicated amount of data vol-
ume, which can be transferred without further pricing. After
using up this monthly amount of data, the user has to pay for
the desired services according to the transferred data volume
(byte-based). Moreover, analogous to GSM networks a user
can utilize “unused” data volume, i.e., the unused fraction of
the prepaid monthly amount of data volume, in subsequent
months. If the monthly amount of data is unrestricted, this
pricing would become a flat-rate pricing and if there is no
monthly payment, the pricing follows a usage-based policy.
Thus, our pricing policy constitutes a hybrid approach of flat-
rate and usage-based pricing.
The update of the queueing weights can now be extended
in a way that users consuming their monthly amount of data
are served with a lower priority than users currently paying for
their data transfer. Therefore, we introduce a new weight w&amp;apos;
corresponding to the not paying users. The weight w&amp;apos; must
be sorted in the weights w1, ... , wP and the iterative update
algorithm (9)–(10) can be applied to the P + 1 weights as
described above. In order to distinguish not paying users
with different priorities these users are served by the WFQ
</bodyText>
<equation confidence="0.67203175">
scheduler with weights w1 , ... , wP relative to w&amp;apos;. That
is, WFQ is applied to 2 · P weights, i.e., w1, ... , wP and
(w&amp;apos;/w) · w1, ... , (w&amp;apos;/w) · wP with w = w1 + · · · + wP.
4.3. Implementation issues
</equation>
<bodyText confidence="0.979622628205128">
As outlined in section 2.1, the controlled system parameters
for QoS and revenue improvement, i.e., η, bh, wi, ϕi, con-
stitute an integral component of the proposed extension to a
BSC. The adjustment of system parameters is only based on
implicit information that is directly measured by the online
monitoring component. Therefore, no additional signaling
with other BSCs is necessary for updating system parameters.
The online monitored QoS measures, i.e., PLP, HFP, CBP,
NRTi , and THRi , can easily be derived and stored within
the BSC (see figure 1). The PLP can directly be determined
by counting the number of IP packets, which are lost due to
buffer overflow in the NRT queue. HFP as well as the CBP is
determined by the non-admitted handover calls and new calls
in the admission controller, respectively. Admission, termina-
tion, and handover of NRT calls enable the profiling of NRTi ,
the number of non real-time sessions with priority i. More-
over, the packet scheduler allows the throughput computation
of NRT users according to their individual priorities. Fur-
thermore, no time consuming signaling is needed to transfer
the system pattern inside the BSC because the online perfor-
mance monitoring component and the performance manage-
ment entity both reside in the BSC.
The question arises how call charging can be accomplished
for the considered pricing policies in 3G mobile networks.
For pricing policy (a), i.e., a fixed payment per kbit, call
charging can easily be processed by the subscription manage-
ment component of the operation subsystem (OSS) by means
of the call charging mechanism using the home location reg-
ister (HLR) [1]. Similarly, the hybrid pricing scheme can be
realized except that the remaining amount of prepaid data vol-
ume has to be stored in the HLR for charging the transferred
data volume. Utilizing these existing charging mechanisms,
no additionally signaling overhead arises for charging data
services. The throughput-based pricing policy (pricing pol-
icy (b)) just slightly changes the situation and can easily be
implemented within the BSC using a local copy of the user’s
HLR charging data fields. This local data minimizes signal-
ing overhead of individual user charging. According to the
transferred data volume and current throughput of the user’s
bandwidth class, this local charging profile is continuously
updated. Handovers with changing BSC of response induce
the transfer of this local charging profile to the new BSC of
response. Subsequently, these local data have to be updated
in the HLR for individual user accounting after termination of
the call. Note, that this transfer of local charging profiles can
naturally be embedded in the OSS functionality.
5. Evaluation of the adaptive performance management
strategies
5.1. Traffic characterization for 3G networks
For traffic modeling of RT applications we utilize the ap-
proach proposed in [18], where variable bit rate video traffic
is modeled in terms of time-discrete M/G/∞ input processes.
This model is based on measured video streams and ef-
ficiently captures the correlation structure of the consid-
ered video traffic applying the time-discrete M/G/∞ input
process. The generated traffic is transformed utilizing a hy-
brid Gamma/Pareto numerical transformation in order to cap-
ture the marginal distribution of the measured traffic stream.
Subsequently, the synthetically generated traffic is broken
down to IP packets of a maximum size of 1500 bytes, which
are uniformly distributed within a given frame-duration of the
MPEG video sequence comprising of 1/30 s. Note that this
traffic model does not propose information for modeling RT
session durations. Therefore, we assume session durations to
be exponentially distributed (see section 5.2).
Recent recommendations for modeling NRT traffic and an-
alytical traffic models for 3G mobile networks are proposed
in [15,16], respectively. The traffic model is based on real
measurements conducted at an Internet service provider dial-
in link, which comprises comparable characteristics of future
mobile networks [17], i.e., different access speeds, influence
of the user behavior due to different tariff limits, as well as
asymmetric upand downlink traffic. Based on these mea-
surements a NRT traffic model is conducted, applying the idea
of the single user traffic model, which describes traffic charac-
teristics on session-level, connection-level, i.e., application-
level, and packet-level, respectively. The key insight of this
modeling approach lies in an appropriate scaling procedure of
</bodyText>
<figure confidence="0.78952375">
216 C. LINDEMANN ET AL.
Table 1
Characteristics for different UMTS session types.
Circuit switched Streaming real time (RT) Interactive non real time (NRT)
voice service Audio Video high priority normal priority low priority
Portion of arriving requests 25% 12% 3% 6% 18% 36%
Session duration 120s 180s determined by session volume distribution
Session dwell time 60s 120s 120s
</figure>
<bodyText confidence="0.992916114093959">
the measured trace data towards typical bandwidth classes of
3G mobile networks, i.e., 64 kbps, 144 kbps, and 384 kbps.
In this context, a bandwidth class denotes the maximum band-
width capability of future handheld devices. We refer to [15]
for details of the NRT traffic model, especially for the para-
meterization of the traffic characteristics.
5.2. The simulation environment
In order to evaluate the proposed approach for adaptive con-
trol, we developed a simulation environment for a UMTS ac-
cess network, i.e., a UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access Network
(UTRAN [3]). The simulator considers a cell cluster com-
prising of seven hexagonal cells with corresponding trans-
ceiver stations (i.e., Node B elements), that are managed by
a base station controller (i.e., a Radio Network Controller,
RNC). We assume that a mobile user requests a new session
in a cell according to a Poisson process. When a mobile user
starts a new session, the session is classified as voice, RT,
or NRT session, i.e., with the session the user utilizes voice,
RT, or NRT services mutually exclusive. RT sessions con-
sist of streaming downlink traffic corresponding to the UMTS
streaming class specified by 3GPP [2] and NRT sessions con-
sist of elastic traffic and correspond to the UMTS interactive
class or background class, respectively. For the year 2010
an amount of about 50% voice calls is anticipated [26]. We
assume that one half of the voice calls are served over the fre-
quency spectrum for traditional GSM services (i.e., 890–915
and 935–960 MHz) and the second half is served over the new
frequency spectrum allocated for UMTS. Nevertheless, the
simulator considers only the new frequency spectrum. There-
fore, we assume that 25% of the call requests are voice calls
whereas RT and NRT sessions constitute 15% and 60% of the
overall arriving requests (see table 1).
Subsequently, we have to specify the QoS profile for RT
and NRT sessions. For RT sessions the simulator considers
two QoS profiles, i.e., a low bandwidth profile comprising of
a guaranteed bit rate of 64 kbps corresponding to streaming
audio and a high bandwidth profile comprising of a guaran-
teed bit rate of 192 kbps corresponding to streaming video.
According to the RT traffic model presented in section 5. 1, we
assume that 80% of the RT sessions utilize the low bandwidth
profile whereas the remaining 20% utilize the high bandwidth
profile. Following the single user traffic model, NRT ses-
sions are partitioned according to different bandwidth classes
as follows: 60% for 64 kbps, 30% for 144 kbps, and 10%
for 384 kbps, comprising of different priorities (see table 1),
respectively.
The amount of time that a mobile user with an ongoing
session remains within the cell is called dwell time. If the ses-
sion is still active after the dwell time, a handover toward an
adjacent cell takes place. The call/session duration is defined
as the amount of time that the call will be active, assuming it
completes without being forced to terminate due to handover
failure. We assume the duration of voice calls and RT ses-
sions to be exponentially distributed. As proposed in [6], the
dwell time is modeled by a lognormal distribution. All corre-
sponding mean values are shown in table 1. A NRT session
remains active until a specific data volume drawn according to
a bandwidth-dependent lognormal distribution is transferred.
To distinguish between NRT traffic classes, the UMTS simu-
lator implements a WFQ scheduler with three packet priori-
ties: 1 (high), 2 (normal), and 3 (low) with weights w1 = 4,
w2 = 2, and w3 = 1. These priorities correspond to the
traffic handling priority specified by 3GPP. To model the user
behavior in the cell, the simulator considers the handover flow
of active mobile users from adjacent cells. The iterative pro-
cedure introduced in [4] is employed for balancing the incom-
ing and outgoing handover rates. The iteration is based on the
assumption that the incoming handover rate of a user class at
step i + 1 is equal to the corresponding outgoing handover
rate computed at step i .
5.2.1. UMTS system model assumptions
The simulator exactly mimics UMTS system behavior on the
IP level. The focus is not on studying link level dynam-
ics. Therefore, we assume a reliable link layer as provided
by the automatic repeat request (ARQ) mechanism of the
Radio Link Control (RLC) protocol. As shown in [22] for
the General Packet Radio Service (GPRS), the ARQ mecha-
nism is fast enough to recover from packet losses before reli-
able protocols on higher layers (e.g., TCP) recognize these
losses due to timer expiration. Thus, a reliable link level
can be assumed when considering higher layer protocol ac-
tions (see, e.g., [20]). To accurately model the UMTS radio
access network, the simulator represents the functionality of
one radio network controller and seven Node B transceiver
stations, one for each of the considered cells. Since in the
end-to-end path, the wireless link is typically the bottleneck,
and given the anticipated traffic asymmetry, the simulator fo-
cuses on resource contention in the downlink (i.e., the path
RNC → Node B → MS) of the radio interface.
The simulator considers the UTRAN access scheme based
on Wideband-Code Division Multiple Access (W-CDMA) in
Frequency Division Duplex mode (FDD) proposed by 3GPP
[1]. In FDD downlink, a division of the radio frequencies into
IMPROVING QoS AND PROVIDER REVENUE IN 3G MOBILE NETWORKS 217
four physical code channels with data rates of 1,920 kbps each
up to 512 physical code channels with 15 kbps data rates each
is possible. Therefore, the overall bandwidth that is available
in one cell is 7,680 kbps. For the channel coding, we assume
a convolution-coding scheme with coding factor 2. In the ex-
periments without adaptive control the handover bandwidth
portion bh is 5% and the NRT queue threshold η is set to 95%.
The simulation environment was implemented using the sim-
ulation library CSIM [7]. In a presimulation run the handover
flow is balanced, for each cell at the boundary of the seven-
cell cluster. All simulation results are derived with confidence
level of 95% using the batch means method. The execution
of a single simulation run requires about 40–60 min of CPU
time (depending on the call arrival rate) on a dual processor
Sun Sparc Enterprise with one GByte main memory.
5.2.2. Implementation of the hybrid pricing policy in the
simulator
According to the hybrid pricing policy as introduced in sec-
tion 4.2.2, the user’s overall remaining amount of prepaid data
volume d out of the user’s monthly data volume D is deter-
mined at the beginning of a session. Moreover, the remain-
ing amount of data volume of previous months r is deter-
mined. For simulation study purposes, this is accomplished
by choosing the random value d uniformly out of the interval
[0, kD]. kD captures the monthly amount of data a user typ-
ically transfers, i.e., a user typically transfers a multiple k of
the data volume D that is available for a fixed monthly pay-
ment. The random value r, is sampled according to a uniform
distribution out of the interval [0, 0.1 D], where 0.1 D mea-
sures the maximum amount of “unused” data volume of pre-
vious months. If d exceeds D + r the user has no remaining
prepaid data volume, including the data volume of the cur-
rent and the previous months. Otherwise, there is a remaining
amount of prepaid data volume D + r − d for the considered
user and additional pricing arises only, if the transferred data
volume of the user session exceeds D + r − d. Thus, during
the user session the remaining data volume has to be updated
according to the actually transferred data.
In the simulation studies we utilize the proposed hybrid-
pricing scheme with a prepaid monthly data volume of
150 MB. According to the different priority classes 1, 2,
and 3, the volume-based pricing for transferred data exceed-
ing the prepaid monthly data volume comprises of 20, 15,
and 10 cost-units per MB, respectively. Considering the
changing traffic loads according to the daytime, this approach
can be refined, by the notion of different pricing for daily peri-
ods of time. For the parameterization of the typically monthly
transferred data volume, we assume k = 2. Note that the
parameterization of the pricing scheme is chosen for demon-
stration purposes only. Due to the high flexibility of the hy-
brid pricing scheme, it can be easily extended towards multi-
ple, concurrent pricing schemes comprising of, e.g., different
monthly amounts of prepaid data volumes, different payments
for the individual priority classes, or a pure usage-based pric-
ing as well as pure flat-rate pricing
</bodyText>
<figureCaption confidence="0.992695">
Figure 2. Impact of adaptive performance management on non real-time
traffic
</figureCaption>
<subsubsectionHeader confidence="0.525004">
5.3. Performance results
</subsubsectionHeader>
<bodyText confidence="0.986844916666667">
Using simulation experiments, we illustrate the benefit of the
proposed unified approach for adaptive performance manage-
ment of UMTS systems. In particular, we show the improve-
ment of QoS measures and the increase in revenue earned by
service providers. The presented curves plot the mean values
of the confidence intervals for the considered QoS measures.
In almost all figures, the overall call/session arrival rate of
new mobile users is varied to study the cell under increasing
load conditions. For ease of notation, results with and without
adaptive performance management (APM) are abbreviated by
APM on and APM off, respectively.
In a first experiment, we investigate the effect of adap-
tive control on the threshold for the buffer size of the NRT
queue denoted by η. Figure 2 shows the NRT packet loss
probability (a) and the average number of NRT users in the
cell (b) for the UMTS system with and without adaptive con-
trol. Furthermore, the figures distinguish between different
desired loss levels β as introduced in section 3.2. We observe
that the APM achieves a substantially decrease in packet loss
probability. Moreover, the packet loss probability can be kept
below a constant level for increasing arrival rates of mobile
users. Note, that this level slightly differs from the desired
level of the QoS measure. This is due to the fact that the up-
date function only decreases the NRT threshold if the online
</bodyText>
<figure confidence="0.994878">
218 C. LINDEMANN ET AL.
(a
</figure>
<figureCaption confidence="0.744451">
Figure 3. Number of packet losses for a half day window of a weekly usage
pattern.
measured packet loss probability is greater than 0. There
</figureCaption>
<bodyText confidence="0.999849487179487">
fore, the packet loss probability is in steady state also slightly
greater than0. Nevertheless, figure 2 shows that the resulting
packet loss probability can be adjusted quite well. For very
low arrival rates, the packet loss probability is increased com-
pared to the case without adaptive control. This is because
the packet loss probability is below the desired level and q is
adjusted towards 100%.
Figure 2(b) shows the average number of NRT users ad-
mitted in the cell. For all curves, the number of NRT users in
the cell first increases up to about 70 users for an arrival rate of
1.0 arrivals per second. For higher arrival rates the admission
controller decides to reject requests depending on the choice
of the NRT threshold. In the case without APM the num-
ber of NRT users approaches 100 whereas in the cases with
adaptive control less users are admitted in the cell because
the threshold parameter q is decreased (e.g., about 80 users
for 0 = 0.001). For high arrival rates a slightly decrease
of the average number of NRT users can be observed. This is
due to the fact that with increasing arrival rate the competition
between voice, RT and NRT traffic decreases the bandwidth
capacity available for NRT traffic. Therefore, less NRT users
are admitted.
In the experiment presented in figure 3, we study the ab-
solute number of packet losses observed in one hour for a
transient scenario, i.e., the arrival rate of new calls is chang-
ing every hour according to a half day window of a weekly
usage pattern [15]. The purpose of this experiment is to show
that the adaptive performance management is fast enough to
react on changing traffic conditions, i.e., to effectively adjust
the NRT threshold in order to reduce packet losses. The bars
shown in figure 3 correspond to the number of packet losses
for experiments with and without adaptive control. Further-
more, the figure distinguishes between a desired loss level 0
of 0.01 and 0.001, respectively. The new call arrival rates con-
sidered in one hour are depicted above the bars. We conclude
from figure 3 that for a real-life pattern of changing arrival
rates the packet losses can be effectively controlled by the
APM. This justifies the choice of the gradient m = −0.02 in
the update function for the NRT threshold
</bodyText>
<figureCaption confidence="0.836676">
b)
Figure 4. Impact of adaptive performance management on handover traffic
</figureCaption>
<bodyText confidence="0.9997475">
Next, we study the effect of the APM on the handover
traffic. Figure 4 shows the handover failure probability (a)
and the new call blocking probability (b) for the UMTS sys-
tem with and without APM. Similar to figure 2, we distin-
guish between different desired levels 0 for the handover fail-
ure probability. The desired level for new call blocking is
fixed to 0.1. Note, that for controlling the handover band-
width the desired level 0 can be used only to adjust the de-
gree of prioritization of handover failure over new call block-
ing. Distinct from the packet loss probability, it cannot be
expected to keep the handover failure probability at a con-
stant level for increasing traffic load. That is for two rea-
sons: (1) the handover bandwidth is adjusted according to
two QoS measures that have a contrary influence and (2) the
increase of the handover bandwidth must be limited by a
certain portion of the overall available bandwidth (see sec-
tion 3.2). If this limit is reached handover failures occur
more frequently for further increasing call arrival rate. These
two effects can be observed in the curves of figure 4. Nev-
ertheless, the handover failure probability is improved more
than one order of magnitude for call arrival rates between
0.75 and 1.25 call requests per second and a desired loss
level 0 = 0.001. When studying the blocking probabil-
ity of new voice calls and RT sessions (see figure 4(b)),
we surly observe a higher blocking probability of new calls
in the case with adaptive control and high arrival rate. In
</bodyText>
<figure confidence="0.581917">
IMPROVING QoS AND PROVIDER REVENUE IN 3G MOBILE NETWORKS 219
</figure>
<figureCaption confidence="0.9818">
Figure 5. Improving QoS for high priority non real-time users.
Figure 6. Effect of adjusting WFQ weights on bandwidth utilization of NRT
traffic
</figureCaption>
<bodyText confidence="0.984732615384615">
fact, almost all call requests are blocked if system load is
high.
In a next experiment, we study the impact of NRT users on
QoS by the adaptive control of the queueing weights as intro-
duced in section 4.2. Figure 5 plots the average throughput
per user for each priority class of NRT traffic. As shown in
table 1, we assume 10% NRT users with high priority, 30%
with normal priority, and 60% with low priority. Recall, that
higher priority service is more expensive and, hence, more
users choose low priority service. If the overall load in the
cell is very low (i.e., less than 0.3 call arrivals per second)
each NRT user receives the maximal throughput independent
of the priority class. However, when the cell load is further
increased (arrival rates of more than 0.5 arrivals per second),
throughput for users of all priority classes decreases. The in-
tention of adaptively controlling the queueing weights is to
reduce heavy throughput degradation of high priority users
in this case. The performance increase of high priority users
and the decrease of low priority users are shown in figure 5.
Figure 6 plots the bandwidth portion utilized for each prior-
ity class of NRT traffic. For low arrival rate (i.e., less than
0.5 call arrivals per second) NRT users with low priority uti-
lize the greatest portion of the NRT bandwidth because most
NRT users have priority low. When the cell load is increased
(arrival rates of more than 0.5 arrivals per second), the band-
Figure 7. Revenue improvement for usage-based pricing policy.
width will be utilized more and more by high priority users.
The adaptive control of the WFQ weights decides to intensify
this effect because users belonging to priority high suffer from
the high population of low priority users. Figures 5 and 6 are
derived from simulation runs with ct = 1/2 (see section 4.2).
In the following experiments, we study the impact of con-
trolling the queueing weights on the revenue function (see
equation (8)) for the three proposed pricing policies, i.e.,
usage-based, usage-/throughput-based, and the hybrid pricing
policy. From the revenue function the average (steady state)
provider revenue 0 in the considered cell can be derived. Re-
call that the available bandwidth for NRT traffic is variable for
different call arrival rates. Therefore, we consider the revenue
earned by the provider in one hour per available bandwidth
unit, i.e., per available kbit, for NRT traffic. Figure 7 shows
the provider revenue for the usage-based pricing policy (i.e.,
y = 0) and different values of the exponent ct. As discussed
in section 4.2, the best revenue improvement will be achieved
with priority queueing. From the curves we conclude that the
update strategy increases the revenue in one cell successfully
for the considered traffic assumptions. Recall that the revenue
improvement stems from a shift in bandwidth utilization to-
wards higher priority users (see figure 6) if the population of
high priority users is low compared to users of lower priority.
Figure 7(b) shows the revenue improvement for different
user populations. In the experiment the percentage of high
</bodyText>
<figure confidence="0.853152">
220 C. LINDEMANN ET AL
</figure>
<figureCaption confidence="0.999872">
Figure 8. Revenue improvement for usage-/throughput-based pricing policy.
Figure 9. Revenue improvement for hybrid pricing policy
</figureCaption>
<bodyText confidence="0.995002882352941">
priority users among the arriving user requests is varied. The
remaining users are assumed to be low priority users. Normal
priority users are not considered in this experiment (i.e., 0%
normal priority users). This figure shows how the adaptive
control of the queueing weights works. As expected, for a low
percentage of high priority users the corresponding weight
is increased. Therefore, QoS for high priority users and the
provider revenue is also increased. For more than 50% high
priority users the revenue is the same as in the case without
adaptive control. No further revenue improvement is allowed
because degradation of QoS for low priority users would be
unacceptable. Considering a weak relation among the weights
as introduced in section 4.2 would decrease the revenue com-
pared to the case without adaptive control for more than 50%
high priority users. This might be useful to increase QoS for
users of low population independent of their priority class.
Figure 8 shows the revenue improvement for the usage-/
throughput-based pricing policy and scaling exponents γ =
1/4 and γ = 1/16. In the last experiment we studied the
revenue improvement for the hybrid pricing policy (see fig-
ure 9). We assume that half of the arriving users start their
session in non-paying mode (i.e., k = 2). The curves distin-
guish between weights w&amp;apos; = 1 and w&amp;apos; = 2 for the non-paying
users. Furthermore, the revenue for the case with and without
adaptive control is compared. The curves are derived from
simulations with γ = 0 and α = 1/2. From the revenue
curves of figures 7–9 the average monthly revenue can be
computed considering a daily/weekly usage-pattern and dif-
ferent splits of call arrival rates of users requesting different
services (i.e., voice, RT, NRT with different priorities). Com-
paring the monthly revenue for the pricing policies used in
figures 7–9 with the monthly revenue for the hybrid pricing
policy a provider can determine values such as the monthly
free data volume and monthly payment per user
</bodyText>
<sectionHeader confidence="0.997532">
6. Conclusions
</sectionHeader>
<bodyText confidence="0.999965793103448">
We introduced a unified approach based on a mathematical
framework for the adaptive performance management of 3G
mobile networks. Opposed to previous work [8,13,19,21,25],
the improvement of quality of service (QoS) and the optimiza-
tion of mobile service provider revenue was considered in an
integrated way. The unified approach aims at improving both
QoS for mobile subscribers and increasing revenue earned by
service providers. System parameters controlled by adaptive
performance management constitute the portion of bandwidth
reserved for handovers, the buffer threshold of the queue for
non real-time traffic, and the weights of a weighted fair queue-
ing packet scheduler.
Using the UMTS traffic model of [15] and a simulator on
the IP level for the UMTS system, we presented performance
curves for various QoS measures to illustrate the benefit of
the unified approach for adaptive performance management.
We introduced update functions that effectively control the
packet loss probability and the handover failure probability.
Considering usage-based, usage-/throughput-based, and hy-
brid pricing policies, we showed that the provider revenue in
one cell can be significantly increased by the adaptive control
of the queueing weights.
Throughout the paper, we considered the services and QoS
profiles standardized for UMTS. Thus, the proposed approach
for adaptive control is tailored to UMTS networks. How-
ever, by considering other services and QoS profiles, the ba-
sic ideas underlying the unified approach for adaptive perfor-
mance management can also be applied for the adaptive con-
trol of other kinds of multi-service IP networks
</bodyText>
<sectionHeader confidence="0.99215">
References
</sectionHeader>
<reference confidence="0.998745947368421">
1] 3GPP,http://www.3gpp.org
[2] 3GPP, QoS concept and architecture, Technical Specification TS
23.107 (September 2001).
[3] 3GPP, UTRAN overall description, Technical Specification TS 25.401
(September 2001).
[4] M. Ajmone Marsan, S. Marano, C. Mastroianni and M. Meo, Perfor-
mance analysis of cellular mobile communication networks supporting
multimedia services, Mobile Networks and Applications 5 (2000) 167–
177.
[5] K. Aretz, M. Haardt, W. Konhäuser and W. Mohr, The future of wire-
less communications beyond the third generation, Computer Networks
37 (2001) 83–92.
[6] F. Barceló and J. Jordán, Channel holding time distribution in public
cellular telephony, in: Proceedings of the 16th International Teletraffic
Congress, Edinburgh, Scotland (1999) pp. 107–116.
IMPROVING QoS AND PROVIDER REVENUE IN 3G MOBILE NETWORKS 221
[7] CSIM18 – The Simulation Engine, http://www.mesquite.com
[8] S.K. Das, R. Jayaram, N.K. Kakani and S.K. Sen, A call admission and
control scheme for Quality-of-Service provisioning in next generation
wireless networks, Wireless Networks 6 (2000) 17–30.
[9] A. Demers, S. Keshav and S. Shenker, Analysis and simulation of a fair
queueing algorithm, in: Proceedings of the International Symposium
on Communications Architectures and Protocols (SIGCOMM), Austin,
TX (1989) pp. 1–12.
[ 10] S. Floyd and V. Jacobson, Link-sharing and resource management mod-
els for packet networks, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 3
(1995) 365–386.
[11] X. Geng and A.B. Whinston, Profiting from value-added wireless ser-
vices, IEEE Computer 34 (August 2001) 87–89.
[12] A. Gupta, D.O. Stahl and A.B. Whinston, The economics of network
management, Communications of the ACM 42 (1999) 57–63.
[13] A. Gupta, D.O. Stahl and A.B. Whinston, Priority pricing of inte-
grated services networks, in: Internet Economics, eds. L. McKnight
and J. Bailey (MIT Press, 1995) pp. 323–378.
[14] G. Haring, R. Marie and K.S. Trivedi, Loss formulas and their appli-
cation to optimization for cellular networks, IEEE Transactions on Ve-
hicular Technology 50 (2001) 664–673.
[15] A. Klemm, C. Lindemann and M. Lohmann, Traffic modeling and
characterization for UMTS networks, in: Proceedings of GLOBECOM
2001, San Antonio, TX (November 2001) pp. 1741–1746.
[16] A. Klemm, C. Lindemann and M. Lohmann, Traffic modeling of IP
networks using the batch Markovian arrival process, in: Proceedings of
Tools 2002, London, Great Britain (April 2002) pp. 92–110.
[17] J. Kilpi and I. Norros, Call level traffic analysis of a large ISP, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 13th ITC Specialist Seminar on Measurement and Mod-
eling of IP Traffic, Monterey, CA (2000) pp. 6.1–6.9.
[18] M. Krunz and A. Makowski, A source model for VBR video traffic
based on M/G/oo input processes, in: Proceedings of the 17th Confer-
ence on Computer Communications (IEEEINFOCOM), San Francisco,
CA (1998) pp. 1441–1449.
[19] C. Lindemann, M. Lohmann and A. Thiimmler, Adaptive performance
management for UMTS networks, Computer Networks 38 (2002) 477–
496.
[20] R. Ludwig, A. Konrad and A.D. Joseph, Optimizing the end-to-end
performance of reliable flows over wireless links, in: Proceedings
of the 5th Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (ACM
MobiCom), Seattle, WA (1999) pp. 113–119.
[21] J.K. MacKie-Mason and H.R. Varian, Pricing the Internet, in: Public
Access to the Internet, eds. B. Kahin and J. Keller (MIT Press, 1995)
pp. 269–314.
[22] M. Meyer, TCP performance over GPRS, in: Proceedings of the First
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (IEEE WCNC),
New Orleans, MS (1999) pp. 1248–1252.
[23] Mobile Wireless Internet Forum (MWIF), OpenRAN architecture in
3rd generation mobile systems, Technical report MTR-007 (September
2001)http://www.mwif.org
[24] J.M. Peha and A. Sutivong, Admission control algorithms for cellular
systems, Wireless Networks 7 (2001) 117–125.
[25] S. Rao and E.R. Petersen, Optimal pricing of priority services, Opera-
tions Research 46 (1998) 46–56.
[26] UMTS-Forum, UMTS/IMT-2000 Spectrum, Report No. 6 (1999).
[27] H. Zhang, Service disciplines for guaranteed performance service in
packet-switched networks, Proceedings of the IEEE 83 (1995) 1374–
1396.
[28] Wireless World Research Forum (WWRF), http://www.
wireless-world-research.org
Christoph Lindemann is an Associate Professor in
the Department of Computer Science at the Univer-
sity of Dortmund and leads the Computer Systems
and Performance Evaluation group. From 1994 to
1997, he was a Senior Research Scientist at the GMD
Institute for Computer Architecture and Software
Technology (GMD FIRST) in Berlin. In the sum-
mer 1993 and during the academic year 1994/1995,
he was a Visiting Scientist at the IBM Almaden Re-
search Center, San Jose, CA. Christoph Lindemann
is a Senior Member of the IEEE. He is author of the monograph Performance
Modelling with Deterministic and Stochastic Petri Nets (Wiley, 1998). More-
over, he co-authored the survey text Performance Evaluation – Origins and
Directions (Springer-Verlag, 2000). He served on the program committees of
various well-known international conferences. His current research interests
include mobile computing, communication networks, Internet search tech-
nology, and performance evaluation.
E-mail: cl@cs.uni-dortmund.de
WWW: http://www4.cs.uni-dortmund.de/^Lindemann/
Marco Lohmann received the degree Diplom-Infor-
matiker (M.S. in computer science) with honors
from the University of Dortmund in March 2000.
Presently, he is a Ph.D. student in the Computer Sys-
tems and Performance Evaluation group at the Uni-
versity of Dortmund. He is a student member of the
IEEE and the ACM. His research interests include
mobile computing, Internet search technology, and
stochastic modeling.
E-mail: ml@ls4.cs.uni-dortmund.de
Axel Thiimmler received the degree Diplom-Infor-
matiker (M. S. in computer science) from the Univer-
sity of Dortmund in April 1998. Presently, he is a
Ph.D. student in the Computer Systems and Perfor-
mance Evaluation group at the University of Dort-
mund. His research interests include mobile com-
puting, communication networks, and performance
evaluation.
E-mail: at@ls4.cs.uni-dortmund.de
</reference>
</algorithm>
