CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Re-Placing Faith: Reconsidering the Secular-Religious
Use Divide in the United States and Kenya
Susan P. Wyche
Georgia Institute of Technology
85 Fifth St. NW
Atlanta, GA 30308 USA
spwyche@cc.gatech.edu
Paul M. Aoki
Intel Research
2150 Shattuck Ave., Ste. 1300
Berkeley, CA 94704 USA
aoki@acm.org
Rebecca E. Grinter
Georgia Institute of Technology
85 Fifth St. NW
Atlanta, GA 30308 USA
beki@cc.gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we report on design-oriented fieldwork and 
design research conducted over a six-month period in urban 
centers in the United States and Kenya. The contributions 
of this work for the CHI/CSCW community are empirical 
and methodological. First, we describe how recent design 
discourse around “designing technology for religion” 
creates an artificial distinction between instrumental and 
religious ICT use, particularly in developing regions. As 
illustrative examples, we relate three themes developed in 
the course of our fieldwork, which we term mindfulness, 
watchfulness, and embeddedness, to both “secular” and 
“religious” aspects of life in the communities studied. 
Second, we make a methodological contribution by 
describing how we used design sketches of speculative 
design concepts to extend and complement our fieldwork. 
By producing these sketches and soliciting feedback, we 
elicited additional data about how participants viewed the 
relationship between religion and ICT and prompted self- 
reflection on our own ideas.
Author Keywords
Domestic technology, religious technology, sketching
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
A recent flurry of SIGCHI activity – keynotes, workshops 
and sessions at CHI; a new column in interactions – signals 
a new research focus on design for developing regions. But 
what does it mean for the HCI community to engage with 
this agenda? It is not simply design for “international 
users,” nor is it simply design for “development,” with its
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00. 
emphasis on producing “appropriate” and “sustainable” 
technologies addressing goals such as poverty reduction. In 
both cases, pressure for immediate relevance tends to run 
counter to the usual strengths of academic research: a long 
time-scale, a tolerance for exploration and speculation, and 
a strong ethos of theoretical and empirical grounding. 
However, there are opportunities for HCI research that do 
exploit its natural depth and time-scale. An example is 
research on interface principles for computer users with 
limited literacy (e.g., [25,28]), a widely-acknowledged 
challenge for the adoption of information and 
communication technology (ICT) in developing regions.
We have chosen to examine the relationship between the 
design and use of ICT and a very different, but equally oft- 
remarked, societal trend in developing regions: the 
expansion of popular religion. In many countries, including 
key “emerging markets” such as Brazil, Nigeria and Kenya, 
the recent growth of revivalist forms of world religions 
(such as charismatic Christianity [29]) is challenging the 
Western idea that societies inevitably secularize over time 
[7]. The significance of this trend can be seen in estimates 
that by 2050 only about one-fifth of the world’s three 
billion Christians will be non-Hispanic Caucasians [4].
We are conducting a multi-year, multi-sited project 
involving design fieldwork in North America, Sub-Saharan 
Africa, and Latin America. The project focuses on the 
consumption and appropriation of ICT by evangelical and 
revivalist Christians, particularly those attending the kind of 
large, inclusive churches that that are commonly called 
megachurches1 in the United States (U.S.) [36]. 
Furthermore, we wanted to understand how users’ faith 
could inform and inspire concepts for speculative ICT 
devices. To be clear, the project is not aimed at producing 
“ICT for Christians.” Rather, taking for granted the 
importance of religious growth trends, our goal is to 
understand how faith-based worldviews affect adoption and 
use of ICT and how this is relevant in design. Users’ 
worldviews are of profound importance for designers, as 
the interface metaphors used, the worldview implicit in a 
system’s “usage model,” and the language used to describe
1 Megachurches are typically defined as those with 2000 or more regular 
attendees [36,37] and often emphasize rapid congregation growth.
11
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
features can either work for or against a system’s appeal 
and usability. Furthermore, designers’ understanding of 
users’ worldviews affects the degree to which users can 
meaningfully participate in the design process.
In this paper, we report on design-oriented research 
conducted over a six-month period in urban centers in the 
U.S. and Kenya. We begin by discussing previous research 
on religion and ICT, followed by a description of our field 
sites, methods, and participants. We then turn to our 
empirical contribution, a discussion of three themes 
developed in our fieldwork – mindfulness, watchfulness, 
and embeddedness – that highlights how secular and 
religious aspects of life are intertwined, particularly in 
Kenya. We then turn to a design contribution, illustrating 
how sketches of speculative ICT designs can be used to 
extend fieldwork by surfacing more data about the 
relationship between technology and religion.
BACKGROUND: TECHNOLOGY AND RELIGION
Scholars in anthropology and sociology frequently discuss 
religion, yet it is a topic with which ICT designers rarely 
engage directly. This is surprising given its importance to 
billions of people worldwide. Like Bell [5], we speculate 
that this lack of engagement may be due to an assumption 
that technology and religion must live in constant tension, 
each precluding a complete fulfillment of the other. 
Recently, however, religion has arisen more frequently in 
discussions of “international” design (e.g., [23]) and more 
broadly in HCI and CSCW discourse (e.g., [26]. Within 
these communities’ scope of concern, we can identify three 
main threads of work:
Online spirituality. Perhaps the most widely known of the 
three threads, this focuses on the impact of virtuality and 
mediated communication on spiritual life. Studies in this 
genre typically focus on religious practice in online 
community settings [9,30]. A common finding in such 
studies is that of leveling, a flattening of organizational 
hierarchies that in turn raises questions about control [20]. 
These studies also point to the widespread use of 
technologies by laity, e.g., participating in computer- 
mediated prayer, searching for places to attend services, and 
learning about one’s faith [9,30].
Design exercises. Other designers and researchers have 
explored how religious practices can motivate novel design 
ideas. Broadly, these explorations fall into three categories. 
First, there are applications of user-centered design 
techniques to religious tasks. Examples from the HCI 
literature include AltarNation, a system that allows 
physically-isolated individuals to pray and meditate with 
others [17], and Gospel Spectrum, an interactive Bible 
visualization tool [11]. Examples of products include the 
Ilkone i800 Islamic mobile phone [1] and the eQuran e- 
book reader [2]. Second, there are techno-aesthetic 
explorations, such as Soner Ozenc’s illuminated prayer rug 
that glows more brightly as it is turned towards Mecca [1]. 
Third, design has been used to critique and comment on the
intersection of religion and material culture. An example of 
this is the iBelieve [1], a plastic cap that turns an iPod 
music player into a crucifix.
Studies of technological appropriation. Most recently, HCI 
researchers have begun to examine appropriation of 
technology in different religious communities. Wyche et 
al. [39] studied ministers in Protestant Christian churches in 
the Southeastern U.S. Motivated by reports of increasing 
technology use within Protestant Christian ministry 
(particularly in megachurches), their study highlighted how 
pastors use technologies to support administrative and 
spiritual practices. Woodruff et al. [38] studied Orthodox 
Jewish families who employed home automation 
technology to facilitate observation of the Sabbath. Thus 
far, design praxis has been addressed only in the form of 
general design implications.
We build on these threads of prior research and share a 
focus on personal and social religious practice. However, 
we have the additional goals of understanding how practice 
spans the secular-religious divide (particularly in 
developing regions) and illustrating how to bring design 
research into the fieldwork process.
STUDY: SITES, METHODS AND PARTICIPANTS
Site Selection
Our field sites, Nairobi and Atlanta, are urban centers with 
a number of relevant similarities and connections. Both are 
regional commercial centers (Atlanta within the 
Southeastern U.S., Nairobi within eastern Sub-Saharan 
Africa) and have comparable metropolitan populations. 
They are also centers of intense Christian organizational 
activity, with churches always forming, growing, and 
failing. Finally, Atlanta is home to a large Kenyan migrant 
community that facilitated participant recruiting in Nairobi.
Our work in Atlanta is an extension of our prior research on 
ICT use in megachurches [39,40]. Megachurches are noted 
as aggressive adopters of ICT. While only a few percent of 
the U.S. population worships at a true megachurch with 
2000+ attendees, the trends they shape extend throughout a 
highly-concentrated religious landscape (45% of U.S. 
Protestants worship at the largest 10% of churches [37]). 
The prior Atlanta research provides a foundation for 
thinking about ICT use among Christian laity (i.e., those 
members of the congregation who are not part of the 
religious organization) and, combined with the new 
fieldwork, serves as context for comparative research.
Our main interest in Nairobi as a site was not, however, its 
linkage to Atlanta, but the way in which Kenya represents a 
kind of “developing world” Christianity. First, as Table 1 
suggests, Christianity (and particularly renewalist 
Christianity) has a remarkable strength and pervasive 
presence in Kenyan public life. The term renewalist refers 
to Charismatic and Pentecostal Christians, who can be 
broadly distinguished from the evangelical Christians we 
studied in Atlanta in terms of affiliation and practices. For
12
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
% of all respondents who...	U.S.	Kenya
Identify as Christian	78	90
Identify as renewalist	23	56
Attend church at least once a week	44	80
Attend church more than once a week	16	33
Table 1. Selected religious indicators (from [29]).
example, unlike evangelicals, Pentecostals tend to affiliate 
with specific established denominations such as the 
Assemblies of God. Charismatics, while tending toward 
looser denominational affiliations than Pentecostals, share 
worship practices such as speaking in tongues and receiving 
of divine healings [18,29]. Despite these differences, 
renewalist and evangelical Christians share a strong 
commonality in their intense belief that the Bible is the 
word of God and should be interpreted literally. Moreover, 
it is this vibrant form of Christianity that is growing rapidly 
in developing regions and in Kenya (though Islam is often 
more prevalent elsewhere) [18].
Second, to the degree that one accepts an essentialist notion 
of “African traditional religions” (a set of cultural and 
spiritual beliefs indigenous to the African continent), 
contested by Western historians [31] but often alluded-to by 
our Kenyan informants and African scholars (e.g., [8,27]), 
it can be claimed that received traditional culture ties 
together religion and society:
Religion permeates into all the departments of life so fully that 
it is not easy or possible always to isolate it. A study of these 
religious systems is, therefore, ultimately a study of the 
peoples themselves ... [T]o be without religion amounts to a 
self-excommunication from the entire life of society, and 
African peoples do not know how to exist without religion. 
([24], pp. 1-2)
Thus, given our interest in understanding how religion in 
developing regions shapes how believers view and adopt 
ICT, Kenya provided a compelling site.
Methods and Participants
Data collection took place in two phases over a six-month 
period. First, we focused on understanding U.S. 
megachurches and their laity to get a sense for how 
parishioners were using technology; to become familiar 
with the religious terminology used by this population; and 
to explore how religion influences ICT adoption and use in 
a society with which we were familiar. Second, we 
undertook a six-week program of design-oriented fieldwork 
in Nairobi, Kenya.
In Atlanta we conducted semi-structured, at-home 
interviews with 16 individuals who attended area 
megachurches. We recruited megachurch laity, because 
like renewalist Christians, they tend to have a strong and 
vibrant faith, attend church and/or church related activities 
weekly, and are likely to subscribe to a literal interpretation 
of the Bible [18,36]. Participants were recruited using 
community email lists, personal contacts, and flyers
distributed at churches in the metro-Atlanta area. Almost 
all of the primary interviewees (11 women and 5 men) were 
adults in a variety of life-stages (from recent college 
graduate to retirees) and occupations. All attended 
megachurches and self-identified as Christians, half 
identifying with a specific denomination (e.g., Presbyterian, 
Baptist, etc.). Interviews were complemented by 
observational visits to Sunday morning services at ten 
metro-Atlanta megachurches.
In Nairobi, we conducted semi-structured, at-home 
interviews in 10 middle- and upper-middle-class 
households. We recruited these participants by using 
personal contacts that we had developed within the large 
Kenyan migrant community in Atlanta who introduced us 
to people in Nairobi. We later employed a snowball 
sampling technique to achieve a more diverse sample. 
Households were distributed widely throughout the greater 
Nairobi area, with some living an hour outside of the city. 
The interviewees (9 men and 7 women – we interviewed 
both husband and wife in 6 homes) were married working 
adults holding a variety of office occupations and raising 
school-age children. All participants self-identified as 
Christians and seven identified with a specific 
denomination. To complement the interviews we spent the 
night at a participant’s home, attended various social 
gatherings, and visited Sunday morning services at five of 
Nairobi’s largest churches. Furthermore to learn about the 
organizational context of religious life in Kenya, eight 
office interviews were conducted with pastors at some of 
Nairobi’s largest Protestant churches.
In both groups, interviews typically lasted one to one-and-
a-half hours and included a tour of relevant parts of the 
home or office. All participants were asked about how their 
faith and religious activities interact with their daily life and 
technology use. To gain additional insights from a design 
perspective, we used pre-prepared photo-cards to elicit 
stories about faith and technology use from our Kenyan 
participants [15].
The corpus on which our findings are based includes 35 
transcribed interviews, 70 pages of fieldnotes and over 
1000 photographs. Standard techniques for extracting 
analytic points, thematic clustering, and intermediate 
memo-writing were used in the course of the analysis. Data 
triangulation occurred across researchers, across media 
(e.g., fieldnotes, transcripts, artifacts) and across sites (U.S. 
and Kenya). We also made use of design sketching in our 
analysis (we will return to this later in the paper).
FINDINGS
In this section we discuss the findings from our data 
analysis. Broadly, we describe the consistencies within our 
two groups that are relevant to design. However, within the 
set of similarities were differences that were largely due to 
infrastructural disparities, by which we mean the lack of 
access to and availability of ICT and the infrastructure 
required to operate them (i.e., telephony and power) that
13
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
became apparent when we compared the results of our 
research between the two groups.
It was the differences that emerged during analysis that 
were the impetus for sketching design ideas (which we 
describe later in the paper). The sketched technology 
concepts are examples of developing technology grounded 
in daily life, with an emphasis on understanding faith’s role 
in it. Thus, they demonstrate how ICT can be designed for 
both instrumental and religious purposes.
In the remainder of this section, we introduce three themes 
that represent some ways in which people made decisions 
about adoption and use of ICT based on religious criteria: 
mindfulness, watchfulness, and embeddedness. These 
themes are by no means intended to be an exhaustive 
taxonomy of Atlanta or Nairobi life or even of our data. 
However, they do represent a clustering of some specific 
design-relevant aspects of Christian life that emerged from 
our fieldwork.
Mindfulness of faith
During our interviews, we asked how faith influences 
participants’ lives. All of our participants in Atlanta and 
Nairobi talked about continuing to grow and learn about the 
teachings in the Bible and coupled that to wanting to be 
mindful of their faith throughout the day. Mindfulness, or a 
person becoming aware of their thoughts and actions in the 
present moment, is an important element in many religious 
faiths [21]. When asked if they used technology to stay 
focused on their faith, participants answered with stories 
about using computers, software, and mobile phones to do 
so. They also discussed a broader range of technologies – 
such as pen and paper notes – and the role played by these 
technologies in focusing them on their Christian faith.
Individuals in Atlanta and Nairobi both articulated how ICT 
was interwoven with mindfulness. For example, some used 
email or mobile text messaging (SMS) services to receive 
daily Bible-based devotionals. Others described how 
scheduling software helped them structure their days 
around faith-related activities (e.g., morning prayers, Bible 
study, and attending church on Sundays).
Another widespread practice was using technology to send 
and receive prayer requests – solicitations to and from 
others to pray. Kenyans were more likely to use SMS for 
this, whereas Americans would rely on email or check their 
church’s website (many posted weekly lists of parishioners 
in need of prayer online). Both Atlanta and Nairobi 
participants spoke of the centrality of prayer to their faith; it 
directly reminded them of God’s impact in peoples’ lives, 
including their own, particularly during times of crisis. The 
following represents many participants’ thoughts about 
mindfulness and prayer:
One thing that I found very – very helpful to our lives as a 
family and to me as a person is the issue of prayer. I’ve 
prayed for things and I’ve seen them come true. You have a
problem and you don’t know how to solve it. But I find that 
when I pray I find a solution.
– Nairobi churchgoer
One of the most striking consistencies found among our 
participants was the desire to recall their Sunday worship 
experience during the following week. Parishioners in 
Atlanta and Nairobi were particularly interested in 
remembering key phrases of sermons that resonated with 
them so that they could apply it to life situations away from 
the church. This is how one Atlanta Christian described it:
...I mean, I’m learning so much, I mean, it’s something that 
you can go through at home, you know, try to remind yourself 
because it’s easy to get it when you’re there but it’s not easy to 
actively keep it in your memory and to keep applying it.
– Atlanta churchgoer
Note-taking was a strategy employed by more than half our 
participants to help them “actively keep” what was heard on 
Sunday in their memories (Figure 1). Participants talked 
about note-taking in interviews and during church services 
we consistently observed parishioners balancing spiral- 
bound notebooks and Bibles on their laps, attentively 
listening to what was being said and jotting it down. When 
we toured participants’ homes, most showed us stacks of 
notebooks and binders filled with notes from services. 
They took notes because it focused them on what was being 
taught in church and insured what was said on Sunday 
“stuck with them” throughout the week.
They always remind me. You know, like I said, “Out of sight, 
out of mind?” I write things in notebooks and I look through 
them from time to time. So at least I’ll remember what was 
being said. And a lot of things I just integrate into my daily 
life.
– Atlanta churchgoer
You can see these [notebooks] are for personal study. This is 
where I have taken from the church; you can see a 
continuation from this service. I normally write the day, like 
this. I write the days, also the person preaching.
– Nairobi churchgoer
Though the practice of taking notes during services was 
consistent, there were differences between Nairobi and 
Atlanta participants that can be attributed to differences in 
availability of Internet access. In many cases, Atlanta 
participants used the Internet to supplement their note- 
taking activities. Their churches had websites that offered
Figure 1. Participant notebooks in Nairobi and Atlanta.
14
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
outlines, slide presentations, and videos of the sermons that 
parishioners can watch at their convenience.
I use a lot of... recently I’ve been going online to different 
gateway Bible-study places and pulling down Bible studies off 
of there. And then just sometimes instead of writing in a 
journal, I’ll type them up on a computer, save them in a file.
– Atlanta churchgoer
Indeed, all Atlanta participants had Internet access at home 
and reported relying on it to help them “grow in their faith.” 
Examples included watching sermons online, praying with 
family using voice over IP (VoIP) services, and looking up 
Bible verses. In contrast, none of our Nairobi participants 
reported having Internet access at home. Reasons for this 
included high service cost, poor connectivity, and lack of 
personal computers. With fewer supplemental resources 
available, it was important to be more thorough about 
capturing elements of the services in notes while at church.
Whether it was using a sticky note to remind them of a 
friend in need of prayer, reading daily devotionals online, 
or studying a ledger filled with notes, it was clear that 
participants used technologies that have typically been 
associated with secular practice for more than strictly 
instrumental purposes. Interactions with these artifacts 
reminded them that their daily activities were guided by 
something larger than themselves – their Christian faith.
Watchfulness
Many aspects of Kenyan society appear to be strongly 
oriented towards community norms. Consider security. In 
the middle-class homes we visited, security measures in the 
form of private watchmen, gates, walls and reinforced doors 
were universal; this is not surprising given the extreme 
economic inequality in Nairobi. However, what did 
surprise us was how the security measures seemed to 
operate. Private watchmen were unarmed; alarms were 
rarely evident; walls seemed surmountable with effort. 
This in spite of the fact that most, if not all, middle-class 
developments are adjacent to a shantytown. For example, 
in Figure 2, the vast slum of Kibera is just over a low wall 
from one of our participant’s house. Clearly, it is not the 
physical security measures themselves that are deterring 
crime as much as the social controls they represent [14], 
particularly in the form of the unarmed watchmen.
We saw a similar kind of watchfulness seemingly being 
applied to the consumption of media. During tours of 
participants’ homes we asked them to talk about their 
computers, radios, media players (e.g., DVD or VCR) and 
televisions. Family members in seven of the Nairobi homes 
showed us collections of African gospel CDs and Christian 
videos and spoke of keeping their TVs tuned to the news 
and “Family TV” – the country’s lone Christian-oriented 
channel. Our Atlanta participants also showed us media 
collections, but these were more likely to be predominately 
secular rather than religious in content. Given the increased 
access to media content facilitated by Internet access at 
home, our Atlanta participants were more concerned with
avoiding online sites that reported erroneous information 
about their faith or displayed content that opposed their 
values. Whether through the TV or computer, it was 
common for participants in both Atlanta and Nairobi to note 
that secular media contradicted key tenets of their faith and 
that they worked to avoid it.
I just stopped listening to anything else. I just got so tired of 
the, you know, the references to sexuality and stuff like that, 
that I just did not believe in, that I just started listening to 
Christian all the time. And they have a lot of the Christian 
music that I hear on the radio in the contemporary worship.
– Atlanta churchgoer
It means at some point or another you’re going to have to, 
like, evaluate yourself and come to some major decisions. Are 
you following God or are you not following God? Are you 
obeying God or are you disobeying God? You’ll have to make 
those decisions sooner or later when you listen to the station, 
you know. With secular stations you don’t have to make that 
choice. You can just hide in your own cocoon.
– Nairobi churchgoer
Despite this broadly shared characteristic, we found 
differences in how U.S. and Kenyan participants wanted to 
monitor access to media. Like security, Kenyans were 
interested in relying on social controls for enforcement, 
whereas Americans often used physical or technological 
controls. For example, a U.S. college-aged Christian male 
described downloading a program that monitored his 
Internet usage:
There’s one thing. It’s called the XXX Church. And they 
have this accountability kind of stuff. They have this piece of 
software that you download that pretty much keeps track of 
what websites you look at. And if there are any questionable 
kind of ones, because that is something I’ve struggled with.
– Atlanta churchgoer
In contrast, rather than using technology, Kenyans 
monitored media consumption themselves, and were
Figure 2. Security in estate adjacent to Vibera.
15
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
especially vocal about instilling the appropriate values in 
their children so they could make their own decisions 
regarding the programs they watched. This quote from a 
mother of two reflected what other Kenyans said:
When things like wrestling come on [the children] know to 
switch-off and monitor themselves, they switch off by 
themselves because we have taught them this thing is not 
right. They will not watch – when people start showing their 
ways of pornography, they will switch off the TV. They know 
that.
– Nairobi churchgoer
In conclusion, what we want to stress here is that 
irrespective of whether the content was secular or religious, 
faith impacted all of our participants’ interactions with 
media. In other words, faith-based decisions play a role in 
determining whether, and if so how, some people will 
decide to appropriate media and content.
Embeddedness
Rural-urban migration is a general phenomenon in 
developing regions [35], and though all of our participants 
lived in and around Nairobi, many alluded to “the village” 
(i.e., the rural or peri-urban location where they grew up). 
There was a desire to remain embedded in a larger social 
structure, i.e., to retain extensive ties with family and 
community members living in rural Kenya. ICT facilitated 
these ties. Notably, because the landline telephone 
infrastructure is sparse, recent improvements in mobile 
phone cost and coverage have greatly simplified 
communication with family living in the village. A 
recently-deployed money transfer system based on text 
messaging, M-Pesa, has also simplified the process of 
remitting money to distant relatives.
This is not to say that mobile phones have been a panacea. 
One participant noted that one must still sometimes 
schedule a time to call those living in rural areas because 
his extended family members must find a location with 
adequate coverage. More importantly, participants noted 
the difference in their pace of life in the city as opposed to 
the village. Indeed, many professionals talked about how 
the faster pace of life in the city left them with less time to 
engage in faith building activities and to stay connected 
with family members.
So if someone doesn’t understand that – so my mother says, 
“You never call nowadays.” But it’s not that you don’t want to 
call, it’s only that everyday you are rushing. You have to 
make money, big traffic jam, leaving the office to be together. 
You have to run from office to class, from class to the house, 
from the house, you know, you are tired, you sleep.
– Nairobi churchgoer
It may not be clear why rural-urban connections should 
matter any more in Kenya than they do in any other migrant 
population, especially since rural-urban migration is so 
frequently described in terms of urban opportunity (e.g., 
“The choice, for many, is going hungry in the countryside 
or finding a job while living in squalor in [Nairobi]” [3]).
However, in Kenya as elsewhere in Africa [35], migrant 
households are often multi-spatial [13]; for those whose 
urban positions are less secure, the family will maintain 
both rural and urban dwellings to maximize its collective 
economic diversity. Even middle-class Kenyans often 
described Nairobi as a temporary place to live and reported 
plans to return (eventually) to their places of origin.
Of relevance here is that this multi-spatiality has a strong 
cultural element, sometimes called home2 [27], that is based 
in part on elements of traditional religion that have been 
retained in social practice [24]. Tribal and other kinship- 
based connections are still important:
[Maintaining] relationships in African countries is really 
powerful. It’s an integral part of who we are. It’s an integral 
part of our identity. You have relationships with your mother 
and your father and all your siblings and your extended 
family, your uncles, your aunties as if they are part of you...
– Nairobi churchgoer
The ICT use just discussed, then, is not simply a way to 
“stay in touch with friends and family” or a means of 
facilitating economic exchange, but rather takes on 
significance as a means of managing multi-spatial activities 
and relationships that are difficult to “isolate” from 
religious identity and practice.
We are not suggesting that maintaining this embedded 
relationship is inherently less important in the U.S. 
However, there are many more means for families to 
connect in the U.S. (including reliable postal and telephone 
systems) that are far less widely available in Kenya’s rural 
regions. Instead, we want to suggest that, given the role of 
family and community in Kenyan culture, the disconnect 
created by rural-urban migration should be considered in 
ICT development, and that religion is a central component 
of understanding the motivation for wanting these ties.
DISCUSSION: SKETCHING, DESIGN, AND ANALYSIS 
In this section, we turn to our study’s design thread and to 
the paper’s methodological contribution. In conjunction 
with the Kenya fieldwork2 just described, we undertook a 
series of design exercises3 to help frame our findings in 
material terms; we focus here on the production of, and 
interaction around, sketches of speculative design concepts 
[12]. The goal was not “need-finding” but rather to gain 
further insight into the interaction of popular religion and 
the appropriation of ICT. Three main types of outcome 
from these exercises informed the themes emerging from 
the fieldwork. First, the sketching of speculative design
2 Given our broader interest in design for developing regions we focused 
our efforts on concepts grounded in findings from our Kenya fieldwork. 
In the future we will do the same with our U.S. data.
3 During our study, we organized several design engagements with groups 
of Nairobi university students – design students at the University of 
Nairobi and computer science students at Jomo Kenyatta University of 
Agriculture and Technology. Aside from interaction around sketches as 
described here, exercises included a design charrette (collaborative 
studio exercise) and a collection of multi-week iterative design projects.
16
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
concepts, which reified ideas described to us by our study 
participants, helped to elicit discussion of social 
considerations that would shape the appropriation of ICT in 
religious settings. Second, imagining a material object (not 
necessarily a realistic product) that a study participant 
might use to address a particular situation implicitly drew 
out latent practical factors underlying the situation that 
would affect ICT adoption and use. Third, responses to 
sketches of speculative design concepts sometimes led us to 
recognize the need for defamiliarization [6] – to question 
our assumptions about the local context of use. In the 
subsections that follow, we consider the three types of 
outcome in turn, respectively illustrating the interplay of 
design process and fieldwork in developing the themes of 
mindfulness, embeddedness and watchfulness.
Sketching is, of course, a common design practice with a 
large research literature and has long been used to elicit 
feedback from users (see [10] for a general overview). 
Because sketching is low-cost and an efficient way to 
generate multiple ideas, it was a straightforward way to 
“translate” the themes emerging in our data into technology 
concepts. However, sketching is not only a useful tool for 
exploring ideas and eliciting feedback. It can also assist 
designers in their thinking, prompting self-reflection and 
bringing unconscious aspects of experience to conscious 
awareness [33]. Our sketches provided a way for us to
Figure 3. Multimedia capture note-taking system.
Figure 4. Pen-tracking note-taking system.
reflect on our data, one that explicitly used the lens of 
speculative design concepts that reified our understanding 
of the relationship between religion and ICT in Kenyan life.
Over the course of the Kenya fieldwork, we generated and 
used 20 hand-drawn design sketches. In a way analogous 
to keeping fieldnotes or analytic memo-writing, freehand 
sketching during fieldwork helped us to account for and 
describe our observations. It also allowed us to capture 
preliminary ideas that occurred to us or expand upon those 
that were suggested to us during fieldwork. As the 
research progressed, we shared our design sketches with 
groups of students with whom we had established working 
design relationships (see footnote 3) and who were 
knowledgeable about both design (including sketching 
practice) and life in Kenya. All of the sketches were shown 
and the students were asked to provide critiques – comment 
on them, pick a favorite and explain their choice, and so on. 
The discussions below reflect not only our thoughts about 
and responses to the design concepts but theirs as well.
Concepts for mindfulness:
Religion and the appropriation of mundane technology 
Participants expressed an overwhelming desire to stay 
mindful of their faith by integrating it into their daily lives 
during our interviews. This suggested a range of design 
possibilities. For instance, in the same way that material 
artifacts (plaques, sticky notes on refrigerators, and 
notebooks filled with prayer lists) could facilitate 
individuals’ mindfulness of their faith, so might 
computational artifacts. The design questions for us were, 
“Are there issues so specific to the religious use case that 
entirely new systems would be required?” and “Can current 
technology be extended in relatively straightforward ways 
that would make them suitable for religious appropriation?”
As previously mentioned, note-taking was described 
repeatedly in the U.S. and Kenya as a way to stay focused 
in church services, thus helping participants stay mindful of 
the message throughout the week. In response to this we 
produced a number of sketches for electronic note-taking 
systems to be used in church and other places. Given the 
prevalence of mobile phones in Kenya and other emerging 
markets, most of our concepts centered on incorporating 
capture and access features into mobile phones.
Naturally, one series of concepts drew on the substantial 
HCI literature on systems to support note-taking in the 
office and classroom. For example, some concepts (Figure 
3) extend a long line of paper-based physical/virtual note- 
taking interfaces found in the CHI literature (e.g., [34]). 
Some concepts imagined “smart paper” solutions similar to 
Paper++ [22], whereas others (Figure 4) were based on new 
ultrasonic pen-trackers that do not require instrumented 
notebooks or special paper. Figure 4, in particular, was 
imagined as a straightforward extension of existing 
practices and context. Unlike the U.S., where PCs, the 
Internet, and photocopiers are widely available and 
commonly used to disseminate information, Kenyans
17
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
frequently rely on copying information by hand. It thus 
seemed practical to imagine alternative ways for them to 
disseminate written information (i.e., via the mobile phone).
However, we received ambivalent feedback from the 
students about design concepts in which technology was 
clearly visible. On one hand, they were interested in a 
system that would help them archive and share their notes; 
on the other hand they questioned our designs. In part, this 
was due to questions regarding the appropriateness of 
visibly operating “computer”-like technology in a church 
sanctuary. Despite aggressive adoption of technology in 
megachurches in the U.S., there remain understood norms 
about behavior in churches that differ from office and 
classroom environments. The most prominent norm is that 
church is a place of worship, not work. Indeed, reverence 
to a higher power is the priority, unlike office settings 
where efficiency and productivity tend to be more valued. 
These differences must be considered when developing a 
note-taking system for church where the presence of laptops 
is questionable as well as potentially distracting. Potential 
note-taking applications must strive to preserve “inner 
stillness” that accompanies mindfulness towards God.
It does seem like one could, for the most part, provide 
generic technology for these purposes and that it would 
even be useful for more general (at least currently) practices 
like “hand copying.” The design challenge is to make it 
acceptable to use ICT in sensitive situations, in which case 
something like the pen-tracker (which looks like a regular 
pad of paper) may be more acceptable than something that 
is obviously a mobile phone. Finally, considerations would 
have to be made so it preserves, rather than distracts 
reverence during church worship.
Concepts for embeddedness:
Drawing out latent factors
While considering designs to help household members 
maintain their embeddedness in multiple social and spatial 
contexts, we drew on a rich variety of projects on 
“connecting homes” that range from early work on 
Casablanca [16] to recent work on HomeNote [32]. From a 
technical perspective, the design space is well-explored and 
it is easy to come up with concepts. However, in the course 
of doing so, many latent issues come to the fore. For 
example, issues pertaining to families’ communication 
habits surfaced during conversations around Figure 6.
One concept that resulted in positive feedback from the 
students arose from casual observations about home décor. 
During our home visits we were struck by the consistency 
of the “calendar aesthetic” – homes typically had several 
calendars hanging on the living room walls and out-of-date 
calendars often remained hanging (Figure 5). When we 
asked study participants about this, we were typically told 
that many people enjoyed the photographic imagery and 
that access to promotional corporate calendars was widely 
coveted. This quickly inspired the concept of an 
inexpensive, SMS-enabled calendar device with just
Figure 6. SMS-enabled family calendar.
enough intelligence to enter and display a small bit of text 
(i.e., a reference to a daily Bible verse) as well (Figure 6). 
As a calendar, the device would be highly visible, and (as 
with minimally intimate objects [19]) verses could be 
appropriated to communicate either purely phatic signals or 
rich and allusive messages depending on shared context.
In discussions with the students around rural-urban 
communication, design factors we had not fully considered 
became apparent. As mentioned earlier, the pace of life in 
cities differs between the rural settings, thus making finding 
times to talk challenging. Also, individuals living in rural 
setting generally have less disposable income than those in 
the city, making them far less likely to make voice calls or 
return missed calls. Finally, power and mobile connectivity 
can be relatively spotty in rural areas, privileging SMS over 
voice and simple devices over powerful ones. Hence, the 
appeal of the idea lay not only in its aesthetic but in its 
pragmatics.
Concepts for watchfulness:
An encounter with defamiliarization
Our findings suggest that Americans (unlike Kenyans) 
often turned to technology to control their access to media 
content. In addition to the software application described 
by our participant there are a variety of other technologies 
designed to monitor media consumption in the U.S., 
including the “V-chip” for television and Net Nanny 71A for 
the Internet. We naively assumed that a similar approach 
would address the desire of Kenyan parents to ensure that 
their children do not consume inappropriate media. For 
example, we imagined a system that allowed a parent to 
preview media before it was made accessible to children 
and decide whether it could be played for the household
Figure 5. The Kenyan calendar aesthetic .
18
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 7. Remote parental media control.
Figure 8. SMS media recommender system.
members (Figure 7). Similarly, we imagined a system in 
which communities of users sent text messages to rate a 
program in terms of its moral appropriateness (Figure 8) in 
much the same way that online rating and reputation 
systems work on the Internet.
While we did not show these design sketches to study 
participants, we discussed the associated concepts with 
some of them during interviews. The response from these 
participants clearly indicated that case-by-case control was 
not desired. Instead, they stated that they wanted ways to 
instill the right values of parental respect and sexual 
morality into their children and friends so that they could 
trust them not to watch “bad” shows. Rather than relying 
on technology, parents wanted children to apply their 
personal judgment and monitor their own behavior.
Bell and others argues that the challenge for researchers and 
designers is to see beyond the naturalizing of devices and 
experiences to their cultural roots [6]. By “naturalize,” she 
refers to individual’s ideas about cultural phenomena that 
are rooted in their personal experiences. Our engagement 
with Kenyan Christians suggests that defamiliarization can 
also be useful in forcing designers to see their Western- 
centric assumptions about technology use and adoption in a 
new light and prompt designers to consider a wider range of 
options.
Given recent increased interest in producing technology for 
developing regions, we believe that incorporating 
“defamiliarizing exercises” (such as presenting concept
drawings to potential users) can be useful in prompting 
designers to question unwittingly projection of Western 
assumptions about technology adoption and use onto users 
in developing regions.
CONCLUSION
In this paper we presented findings from a six-month 
design-oriented project examining the adoption and use of 
technology for religious purposes. In addition to adding to 
the growing number of design and empirical studies 
examining issues surrounding design of technology for 
developing regions and religious uses of technology, we 
make the additional contributions.
First, we present empirical findings grounded in our 
fieldwork. These illustrate the weak distinction between 
using technology for religious and secular purposes and that 
indeed, understanding how ICT are appropriated for 
religious purposes leads to broader design implications.
Second, we make a methodological contribution by 
describing how we used design sketches to reify our 
cultural and technical assumptions. By integrating design 
sketching early in our research process we were able to 
engage more deeply with the themes emerging from our 
fieldwork and unpack the Western assumptions embedded 
in our work. We suggest that design sketching and the 
dialogic engagement it promotes with users can be a device 
for defamiliarization. We believe integrating techniques 
that allow designers to better engage with users’ needs will 
become more critical as HCI developers focus on 
technology for developing regions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to our participants and our design 
collaborators for sharing their stories and creative thoughts. 
This research was supported in part by a grant from the 
Intel Research Council.
REFERENCES
1. Design and Religion: New Forms of Faith (special 
issue),” I.D. Magazine, March/April, 2006.
2. “Intel partners with Saudi firms to develop electronic 
Quran,” AP Financial Wire, Dec. 19, 2006.
3. “Kenya: Going Up or Down?” The Economist, June 9, 
2007, 59.
4. Barrett, D.B., Kurian, G.T. and Johnson, T.M., World 
Christian Encyclopedia: A Comparative Survey of 
Churches and Religions in the Modern World. OUP, 
Oxford, 2001.
5. Bell, G., “No More SMS from Jesus: Ubicomp, 
Religion and Techno-spiritual Practices,” Proc. 
Ubicomp 2006, Springer (2006), 141-158.
6. Bell, G., Blythe, M. and Sengers, P., “Making by 
Making Strange: Defamiliarization and the Design of 
Domestic Technologies,” ACM TOCHI 12, 2 (2005), 
149-173.
7. Berger, P.L., “The Desecularization of the World: A 
Global Overview,” in The Desecularization of the
19
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
World: Resurgent Religion and World Politics, 
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, MI, 1999, 1-18.
8. Bodewes, C., Parish Transformation in Urban Slums: 
Voices of Kibera, Kenya. Paulines, Nairobi, 2005.
9. Brasher, B.E., Give Me That Online Religion. Wiley, 
New York, 2001.
10. Buxton, B., Sketching User Experiences: Getting the 
Design Right and the Right Design. Morgan Kaufmann, 
San Francisco, 2007.
11. Dang, A., “Gospel Spectrum,” Proc. DUX 2005, AIGA 
(2005), 16(12-19).
12. Dunne, A., Hertzian Tales: Electronic Products, 
Aesthetic Experience and Critical Design. RCA, 
London, 1999.
13. Foeken, D. and Owuor, S.O., “Multi-Spatial 
Livelihoods in Sub-Saharan Africa: Rural Farming by 
Urban Households – The Case of Nakuru Town, 
Kenya,” in Mobile Africa: Changing Patterns of 
Movement in Africa and Beyond, Brill, Leiden, the 
Netherlands, 2001, 125-140.
14. Foucault, M., Discipline and Punish. Vintage, New 
York, 1977 [1975].
15. Heisley, D.H. and Levy, S.J., “Autodriving: A 
Photoelicitation Technique,” J. Consumer Research 18, 
3 (1991), 257-272.
16. Hindus, D., Mainwaring, S.D., Leduc, N., Hagström, 
A.E. and Bayley, O., “Casablanca: Designing Social 
Communication Devices for the Home,” Proc. CHI 
2001, ACM (2001), 325-332.
17. Hlubinka, M., Beaudin, J., Tapia, E.M. and An, J.S., 
“AltarNation: Interface Design for Meditative 
Communities,” Extended Abstracts, CHI 2002, ACM 
(2002), 612-613.
18. Jenkins, P., The Next Christendom: The Coming of 
Global Christianity. OUP, Oxford, 2007.
19. Kaye, J., Levitt, M.K., Nevins, J., Golden, J. and 
Schmidt, V., “Communicating Intimacy One Bit at a 
Time,” Extended Abstracts, CHI 2005, ACM (2005), 
1529-1532
20. Kong, L., “Religion and Technology: Refiguring Place, 
Space, Identity and Community,” Area 33, 4 (2001), 
404-413.
21. Langer, E.J., Mindfulness. Perseus, New York, 1989.
22. Luff, P., Heath, C., Norrie, M., Signer, B. and Herdman, 
P., “Only Touching the Surface: Creating Affinities 
Between Digital Content and Paper,” Proc. CSCW 
2004, ACM (2004), 523-532.
23. Marcus, A. and Gould, E.W., “Crosscurrents: Cultural 
Dimensions and Global Web User-Interface Design,” 
interactions 7, 4 (2000), 32-46.
24. Mbiti, J.S., African Religions and Philosophies. 
Heinemann, London, 1969.
25. Medhi, I., “User-Centered Design for Development,” 
interactions 14, 4 (2007), 12-14.
26. Muller, M.J., Christiansen, E., Nardi, B. and Dray, S., 
“Spiritual Life and Information Technology,” CACM 
45, 2 (2001), 82-83.
27. Mwendwa, S.K.K., Home2: The Poetics and Politics of 
Housing in Kenya. Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of 
California, Berkeley, CA, 2000.
28. Parikh, T., Ghosh, K. and Chavari, A., “Design Studies 
for a Financial Management System for Micro-Credit 
Groups in Rural India,” Proc. CUU 2003, ACM (2003), 
15-22.
29. Pew Forum on Religion &amp; Public Life, Spirit and 
Power: A 10-Country Survey of Pentecostals. Pew 
Research Center, Washington, DC, 2006.
30. Pew Internet &amp; American Life Project, CyberFaith: 
How Americans Pursue Religion Online. Pew Research 
Center, Washington, DC, 2001.
31. Ranger, T., “The Invention of Tradition in Colonial 
Africa,” in The Invention of Tradition, CUP, 
Cambridge, 1983, 211-262.
32. Sellen, A., Harper, R., Eardley, R., Izadi, S., Regan, T., 
Taylor, A.S. and Wood, K.R., “Situated Messaging in 
the Home,” Proc. CSCW 2006, ACM (2006).
33. Sengers, P., Boehner, K., David, S. and Kaye, J., 
“Reflective Design,” Proc. Conf. on Critical 
Computing, ACM (2005), 49-58.
34. Stifelman, L.J., “Augmenting Real-World Objects: A 
Paper-Based Audio Notebook,” CHI ‘96 Conference 
Companion, ACM (1996), 199-200.
35. Tacoli, C., “Rural-Urban Interactions: A Guide to the 
Literature,” Environment &amp; Urbanization 10, 1 (1998), 
147-166.
36. Thumma, S., The Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory: 
The Megachurch in Modern American Society. Ph.D. 
dissertation, Emory Univ., Atlanta, GA, 1996.
37. Thumma, S. and Travis, D., Beyond Megachurch 
Myths: What We Can Learn from America’s Largest 
Churches. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 2007.
38. Woodruff, A., Augustin, S. and Foucault, B.E., 
“Sabbath Day Home Automation: `It’s like mixing 
technology and religion’,” Proc. CHI 2007, ACM 
(2007), 527-536.
39. Wyche, S.P., Hayes, G.R., Harvel, L.D. and Grinter, 
R.E., “Technology in Spiritual Formation: An 
Exploratory Study of Computer Mediated Religious 
Communications,” Proc. CSCW 2006, ACM (2006), 
199-208.
40. Wyche, S.P., Medynskiy, Y. and Grinter, R.E., 
“Exploring the Use of Large Displays in American 
Megachurches,” Extended Abstracts, CHI 2007, ACM 
(2007), 2771-2776.
20
