CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Do Visualizations Improve Synchronous
Remote Collaboration?
Aruna D. Balakrishnan, Susan R. Fussell, Sara Kiesler
Human Computer Interaction Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15232 USA
aruna@cs.cmu.edu
ABSTRACT
Information visualizations can improve collaborative 
problem solving, but this improvement may depend on 
whether visualizations promote communication. In an 
experiment on the effect of network visualizations, remote 
pairs worked synchronously to identify a serial killer. They 
discussed disparate evidence distributed across the pair 
using IM. Four conditions, respectively, offered (a) 
spreadsheet only (controls), (b) individual unshared 
visualizations, (c) view-only shared visualizations, and (d) a 
full-access shared visualization of all evidence. We 
examined collaborative performance, use of the 
visualization tool, and communication as a function of 
condition. All visualization conditions improved remote 
collaborators’ performance over the control condition. Full 
access to a shared visualization best facilitated remote 
collaboration by encouraging tool use and fostering 
discussion between the partners. Shared visualization 
without full access impaired performance somewhat and 
made communication even more vital to identifying the 
serial killer. This study provides direct evidence of 
visualization tool features and partner behavior that 
promote collaboration.
Author Keywords
CSCW, distributed work, empirical studies, information 
visualization, collaboration, communication.
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.3. Group and Organizational Interfaces: Computer- 
supported cooperative work, synchronous interaction.
INTRODUCTION
Henry Wallace had killed nine women when he was finally 
arrested in 1994 for shoplifting at a mall and released [36]. 
Wallace was finally identified as a serial killer when a
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00. 
detective noticed strangulation in deaths two weeks apart. 
The department called a meeting to share information, and 
detectives noted that the last two victims lived in the same 
apartment complex. As this case illustrates, significant 
breakthroughs in detective work often come about when 
someone notices and associates disparate and sometimes 
unlikely facts or events—colloquially, “connecting the 
dots.” Similarly, in intelligence analysis [17], business 
innovation [3], and scientific research [33], success may 
hinge on sharing and seeing linkages in previously 
unnoticed information.
Our focus is problem solving in which successful task 
performance, as in the example above, depends on whether 
individuals share information they have that is crucial to a 
group’s ability to “connect the dots.” We argue here that 
advances in computing that allow collaborators to visualize 
information open up new opportunities for collaborative 
problem solving that have failed in the past. For instance, in 
detective work, a shared map and database of offenses is 
feasible, potentially improving remote collaboration across 
investigators. In this paper, we address this possibility and 
examine the kinds of visualizations that foster collaborative 
problem solving.
Visualization techniques represent complex numerical and 
textual information in pictorial or graphical form and allow 
individuals or groups to perceive and explore patterns in 
data [1, 32, 41]. By removing the burden of mentally 
consolidating disparate information, such holistic 
representations of large amounts of data can help people 
spot anomalies, see new patterns, and improve their 
problem solving success [e.g., 21]. Information 
visualization tools can reduce task completion time and 
increase productivity on many information retrieval tasks 
and in data analysis [14, 34, 39]. Information visualizations 
available to a group can help promote feelings of 
community and foster discussion in “wiki” websites [40]. 
Visualizations also have costs—for individuals who must 
spend time learning how to manipulate them [2] and for 
groups, who can experience the tradeoffs involved in 
working alone versus being aware of others’ work. Much 
less is known about the impact of visualizations in 
collaborative problem solving, although, a few studies have
1227
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
examined collaborative problem solving on such highly 
complex tasks as investigative analysis [e.g., 4, 18, 38].
Complex problem solving as a collaborative task
Two defining attributes of real-world complex problem 
solving are that it is ill structured (in the sense that the 
problem definition is unclear) and, as noted above, that it 
often involves knowledge or information dispersed across 
people and groups [18, 33]. For instance, a detective in 
Illinois investigating a possible serial killer may sift through 
local cold cases looking for linkages but, unknown to this 
detective, relevant cases may exist in other states [e.g., 30]. 
Because of the need for insight and the fact of dispersed 
information, the success of criminal and intelligence 
investigations, scientific discovery, medical problem 
solving, and other important real world problems often 
depends on opportunistic cross-talk across information 
sources and serendipity [9, 33]. Collaboration can increase 
the likelihood that such cross talk and serendipity will 
occur. Collaboration can increase group performance over 
that of individual performance in these situations [15] but 
effective collaboration may depend on the free flow of 
information among partners [22, 35].
There now exist computer-based visualization tools that 
support scanning for hidden linkages and sharing dispersed 
information. Our research question is whether these tools 
do in fact change problem solving strategies, particularly 
information sharing, the collaborative relationship among 
partners, and ultimate collaborative task performance. We 
studied a type of network visualization application similar 
to those used in intelligence analysis and criminal 
investigations (for example, Analyst’s Notebook, 
www.i2inc.com/Products/Analysts_Notebook/default.asp). 
Our experimental design tested whether the network 
visualization tool improved collaborative task performance 
of remote partners who were synchronously solving a 
complex analytic problem, and the extent to which sharing 
features in the tool affected the effectiveness of the 
collaboration.
Information Visualization in Collaboration
Previous studies have shown that visualizations can 
facilitate information sharing in collocated groups [7, 29]. 
Mark, Carpenter, and Kobsa [23], in a seminal study of 
visualization in collaboration, showed that collocated pairs’ 
and remote pairs’ use of visualization tools for making bar 
graphs of statistical data improved their analysis 
performance over that of participants using the tools alone. 
Our work builds on these promising results, examining how 
visualizations aid collaboration.
Visualization tools could aid collaborative problem solving 
in at least two ways. First, if each member of a group has a 
visualization of his or her own data, then the individual 
member’s insight into the problem may improve, which in 
turn would raise the probability of better group 
performance. If so, visualization tools might not need to 
provide for jointly viewable or manipulated data, or even 
promote discussion, as long as they improve the problem
solving of individuals in the group. This idea leads to the 
following general hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: Access to a visualization tool will increase 
remote pair performance in complex problem solving.
Second, prior research suggests that visualization tools may 
improve collaborative performance because they allow for 
shared access to data, and encourage information sharing 
and discussion. In their evaluation of CACHE, a system 
that supports intelligence analysis via visual data 
presentation, Billman et al. [4] report that distributed pairs 
using CACHE collaboratively overcame a priori biases and 
did more effective data analysis. Mark et al.’s [24, 25] 
video analyses of their experimental data showed that 
remote pairs using a visualization communicated more 
intensively than collocated pairs. Their results suggest that 
communication was necessary to take best advantage of the 
visualization tools. This argument leads to the second 
hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2: Access to a visualization tool will increase 
remote pair performance in complex problem solving when 
this access increases information sharing and discussion by 
the pair.
We further asked how fully a visualization tool needs to 
support shared information and communication. 
Visualization tools can support different levels of sharing. 
At the most basic level, each member of a collaboration can 
visualize his or her own data but cannot see others’ 
visualizations (Unshared Visualizations). Or, collaborators 
might be able to view their own and others’ visualizations 
but would be able to directly manipulate only their own 
(Shared View-Only Visualizations); many applications can 
be shared in this manner. A third possibility is that 
collaborators have full access to a shared visualization 
application that allows for viewing everyone’s data and 
jointly manipulating these data (Shared Full-Access 
Visualization) [e.g., 28]. Full access would support shared 
information sharing automatically, which might be 
especially important when collaborators doing complex 
problem solving do not have the same data [e.g. 4]. Full 
access also could promote joint attention and may help in 
the establishment of common ground more than 
applications that allow only shared views [20, 27].
Hypothesis 3: Access to a shared full-access visualization 
tool will encourage discussion between partners, and 
increase remote pair performance in complex problem 
solving beyond the performance of those using a 
visualization tool that supports unshared visualizations or 
shared but view-only visualizations.
METHOD
The design of this study was a single-level factorial, with 
four visualization conditions. Participants worked in pairs; 
pairs were randomly assigned to one of the four 
visualization conditions. The pairs were told they were
1228
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 1. Screenshot of NetDraw, the network diagram tool used by participants.
members of the homicide unit of a local police department 
and had been assigned to a serial killer task force.
Participants
Ninety-four participants were recruited for a “Detective 
Mystery Study” (54 female, 40 male; 81% U.S. born; age 
range 18-64, median age approximately 22). Eighty percent 
of the participants were undergraduate or graduate students. 
Participants were paid $15 for their participation. They 
were told the experiment would last 1.5 hours.
Procedure
For the duration of the experiment, participants were seated 
apart, such that they could not see their partner or their 
partner’s workstation. Participants role-played a pair of 
detectives in Zone 5 of a police department, working 
remotely together to identify a possible serial killer in Zone 
5 and to complete reports on their findings.
The participants were trained on the visualization tool and 
the investigative task, given their detective task assignment, 
and left to work on the assignment for one hour. After an 
hour, or when the participants had completed their report, 
they completed an online survey to elicit their memory of 
the evidence about the serial killer. The experimenter then 
debriefed the participants.
Training. The participants practiced first on a comparatively 
simple problem involving the theft of a laptop computer 
from a college locker room. They read documents 
containing evidence relevant to four suspects in the theft 
and were asked to organize the data using a template that 
organized the evidence as to the motive, opportunity, and 
alibi of each suspect. Then they practiced on a more 
complex problem involving a rash of electronic equipment 
thefts. The case was constructed to give participants 
experience scanning and organizing information across
crimes. Participants also were shown how to use a timeline 
and geographic worksheet.
Participants also were trained how to use NetDraw (see 
Figure 1), the visualization tool adapted for this study, if 
they were assigned to one of the three visualization 
conditions. (Controls were trained on a spreadsheet that 
contained the same data.) A sample network diagram 
depicted the connections among the crimes in the second 
practice case. Participants were familiarized with the 
concepts of nodes and relationships, and they practiced 
using search and manipulating the diagram by location, 
time, and type of theft to give different perspectives on the 
crimes. Participants were encouraged to ask questions 
throughout the training. Training, on average, took 30 
minutes.
Complex Problem Solving Task
The pairs’ task was to identify a possible serial killer in 
Zone 5. Each participant was instructed to report any other 
important information that might help their department 
solve other cases.
Documents and reporting forms. Evidence related to the 
serial killer was scattered in 15 assorted documents 
summarizing 6 cold cases and one open homicide, which 
also functioned as a simple problem solving control task. 
The documents included witness and suspect interviews, 
and coroner’s reports. There were additional documents on 
crime statistics by police district zone, a map of the zone 
and adjacent zones, a bus route map, and a police 
department organizational chart. Participants also could use 
an MO (modus operandi) worksheet for recording dates, 
weapons, and other relevant evidence for each case, a 
suspect worksheet for recording different suspects, their 
connection to the victim, and given alibis, and a timeline 
worksheet for recording when and where each crime took 
place, intended to support inter-case linkages. Finally,
1229
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
participants were asked to complete two online reports on 
the results of their investigation, one on their serial killer 
analysis and another to report any other criminal activity 
they wanted to convey to the department.
All of the evidentiary documents and reports were available 
online and could be opened, searched, put in different or 
new folders, and manipulated freely. To insure that 
sufficient screen space was available to examine multiple 
documents at once, the participants each had access to two 
17” display monitors placed side by side. Also, the 
participants were given paper versions of the instructions 
and worksheets.
Dispersed Evidence. The serial killer was responsible for 
four of the six homicides in the cold cases folder. Eight 
pieces of evidence, six within the cold case files and one in 
the open homicide case file, could be linked to the serial 
killer: similar blunt force trauma injuries to the victims; 
victims killed in the evening after they returned from work; 
victims rode the same bus route; victims lived near the 
same bus route; offender worked at a local hospital on the 
bus route; offender had been identified on the bus (alibi for 
a homicide witness); offender had been seen carrying a tool 
box on the bus. Identifying the serial killer required 
conceptually linking these disparate pieces of evidence 
from different cases rather than simply eliminating a 
defined group of suspects in one current case folder.
The caseload and evidence for the serial killer were 
distributed evenly between each member of the pair. To 
accomplish this, the six unique cold cases and the 
documents of the current open homicide case were divided 
between the pair such that each member received 3 distinct 
cold cases and half of the documentation for the current 
homicide case.
The open homicide case concerned the murder of a woman 
named Darlene Raffield. To solve this homicide, 
participants only had to examine the documents in one 
folder, review the alibis of witnesses, and evaluate their 
motives and opportunities to commit the crime. If a pair 
spent time on this case, they would have less time to focus 
on the complex serial killer task. In pretesting, we found 
that individuals who spent more time on the Raffield 
homicide were less likely to identify the serial killer.
Communication. Participants were given an MSN Instant 
Messenger (IM) client and encouraged to use the client to 
talk with their partner. All IM conversations were recorded.
Visualization Independent Variable
Each pair was randomly assigned to one of four conditions, 
differing with respect to their access to a visualization tool. 
The tool enabled participants to see social and information 
network relationships in the data that linked names, places, 
events and objects, thereby providing a visual analysis 
perspective to identify the serial killer.
The tool used to create a social network diagram of all 
persons mentioned in the documents was NetDraw v.2, a
software application for drawing 2D social network 
diagrams available online from Analytic Technologies. 
Social network diagrams are aptly suited for complex 
problem solving of the kind we used. The evidence 
documents contained over 50 unique names and a diagram 
that represented how each person was connected to various 
other persons could serve to help participants categorize 
and group people, and to view how they might be 
connected across cases. At the start of a session, each 
participant (except for those in the control condition) 
received the software set up to show a predetermined social 
network diagram reflecting the relationships in the 
documents they had.
Figure 1 is a screen shot of the application. Within the 
diagram, each circle (a “node”) represented a person from 
the crimes and each line represented a relationship between 
two people. Victims were represented in red and other 
persons (such as witnesses and suspects) in blue. (Printed in 
black and white, victims are black and others are grey.) 
Thick lines denoted a strong tie, such as married people or 
coworkers. Thin lines denoted a weak tie, such as two 
people who happened to be at the same place at the same 
time (e.g., a waiter serving a restaurant customer or two 
people who rode the same bus route).
Participants could freely manipulate and move the nodes 
within the screen, but they could not change underlying 
relationships. Participants also could search or filter the 
diagrams based on a set of attributes to reveal people with 
common characteristics. Searchable attributes included 
police district zone affiliation, case affiliation, occupation, 
mode of transportation, time of crime, location of crime, 
weapon used to injure the victim, and the injured body part 
of the victim. For example, within the attribute weapon, the 
three options were handgun, blunt instrument, and poison. 
If handgun were selected, all victims who were injured by a 
handgun would be visible on the screen.
The four experimental conditions varied the degree of 
access that participants had to NetDraw.
No Visualization. In this control condition, the pairs did not 
have access to NetDraw. To ensure that they received the 
same information as did participants in the other conditions, 
they were given Microsoft Excel spreadsheets containing 
the same relationship information among the persons 
mentioned in the evidence documents. The names of these 
people were arranged to form a matrix. Relationships in the 
matrix were represented by 0, 1, or 2 scores, which 
reflected no relationship, a weak relationship (such as a 
witness), or a strong relationship (such as a family 
member), respectively. Each participant received a 
spreadsheet that contained the relationship data only for 
their own cases. The experimenter explained the use of the 
spreadsheet and the meaning of the numerical data.
Unshared Visualizations. Each member of the pair had 
access to NetDraw and a manipulable and searchable social
1230
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
	1	2	3	4	5	6	7
Collaborative Performance							
1. Pair identified serial killer (0 - 1)							
2. Time spent problem solving (minutes)	- .77 **						
Visualization Tool Use							
3. Visualization selected (min.)	.11	- .10					
4. Visualization tool active (min.) a	- .07	.14	.94 **				
Communication							
5. Total IM (# IM lines)	.21	- .26t	.00	- .34			
6. Discuss serial killer (# IM lines)	.27t	- .39 *	.14	- .30	.83 **		
7. Discuss Raffield homicide (# IM lines)	.08	- .01	- .01	- .04	.67 **	.21 t	
8. Discuss visualization (# IM lines)	.31 *	- .26	.41 **	- .10	.49 **	.62 **	.27 t
t p &lt; .10, *p &lt; .05, ** p &lt; .01
aVisualization conditions only
Table 1. Correlation of measures of pair performance, use of the visualization tool, and communication (N = 47).
network diagram of the data for the cases that they were 
given. They could not view their partner’s visualization. 
Shared View-Only Visualizations. As in the condition above, 
each member of the pair had access to NetDraw and a 
manipulable and searchable social network diagram of the 
data for the cases that they were given. Each participant 
also had a window within which they could view their 
partner’s social network diagram. They could not search or 
manipulate this diagram but could view how their partner 
acted upon it. The diagrams were shared using the Share 
Applications feature within MSN’s Messenger client.
Shared Full -Access Visualization. As in the Unshared 
Visualization and Shared View Only Visualization 
conditions, each member of the pair had access to NetDraw 
and a manipulable and searchable social network diagram 
of data but unlike the conditions described above, 
participants shared access to a network diagram that 
contained data from all the cases. This diagram could be 
manipulated and searched by both participants in the pair. 
This diagram was shared via a third computer using 
TightVNC, an open-source remote desktop software 
application.
Measures
We had four main sources of data: the final reports 
participants completed when their hour was up (or earlier if 
they had completed their analysis), an online posttest 
survey, IM logs, and WinWhatWhere files that recorded use 
of the visualization tool.
Individual and Collaborative Performance. Participants’ 
identification of the serial killer were culled from their 
written reports. The reports were coded for whether they 
named the serial killer, and whether they named the
Raffield offender. Mentioning the name of the correct 
offender as guilty or a primary suspect who should be 
arrested was counted as identification. We scored 
individuals but were mainly interested in the success of 
collaboration, so both members of the pair had to have 
named the serial killer for the pair to be coded as having 
collaborative successful performance.
Visualization Tool Use. Online activities were recorded via 
WinWhatWhere, a software tool that records the application 
a participant is using, the time spent with that window as 
the selected window, all keystrokes, and screenshots of the 
selected window. Due to resource constraints, one 
randomly selected participant within each pair was 
recorded. To estimate tool use, we calculated the total 
amount of time these participants had the visualization tool 
as the selected window. Active use was highly correlated 
with visualization window selection (see Table 1). In 
analyses, the total minutes the tool was selected and was 
active were log transformed to adjust for skewness.
Communication. We calculated how much conversation 
occurred between members of a pair by counting the total 
number of IM lines they exchanged during a session. An 
IM line refers to each new line within the recorded IM logs.
Participants’ attention to different topics was coded in the 
IM conversations. IM logs were coded by line for whether 
the participants were discussing the serial killer task, 
whether they were discussing the Raffield homicide, and 
whether they were referring to the social network diagram 
(See Table 2 for the coding scheme). IM was coded to be 
related to the serial killer task if the line clearly showed the 
participants talking about or working on searching for 
patterns of a serial killer, for example, “Here we have
Topic	Definition	Example
Serial killer task	Pertains to solving the serial killer task or evidence pointing to the serial killer.	“I see a connection between 2 of my cold cases; they both involve a blunt object.”
Raffield homicide	Discussion pertaining to solving the Raffield homicide.	“I think the person who poisoned Darlene is Wade.”
Visualization	References the visualization tool or the visualization.	“My diagram says that Wayne is involved in the Raffield case.”
		“Move those two out of the way.”
Table 2. Conversational coding scheme.
1231
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
another blunt instrument incident,” or “How do we connect 
these cases?” Discussion of the Raffield homicide was 
coded if the IM line referenced any person related to the 
Raffield homicide or if the line clearly showed them 
thinking about facts relating to the case, for example, “what 
did Darlene Raffield’s boss say?” Because a single IM 
conversation line could be affiliated with both the Raffield 
homicide and the serial killer task, these counts were not 
mutually exclusive. For example, some participants 
discussed whether the Raffield homicide was connected to 
the serial killer task. References to the social network 
diagram were coded if the IM line directly referenced the 
diagram, for example, if participants used words such as 
“diagram,” “visualization,” and “picture,” or discussed their 
active search within the diagram, such as “Watch this” and 
“See how these pop out?” The percentage of total IM lines 
during which IM lines referenced the visualization was 
calculated and log transformed. Over 5,000 lines of IM 
were coded using the scheme. An independent coder coded 
7% of the data (Kappa = .76).
RESULTS
We obtained data from 47 pairs (94 participants), 13 pairs 
in the No Visualization condition, 10 pairs in the Unshared 
Visualizations condition, 12 pairs in the Shared View-Only 
Visualizations condition, and 12 pairs in the Shared Full- 
Access Visualization condition.
Preliminary Analyses
To insure the task was equally difficult and enjoyable 
across conditions we administered the NASA TLX 
workload scale [12], CRT Scales [10], and measured task 
enjoyment on the posttest. Mean scores did not differ by 
condition, suggesting that cognitive ability, cognitive load, 
and enjoyment were equal across conditions. To insure that 
correctly identifying the serial killer reflected comparable 
insight across conditions, on the posttest survey we tested 
participant’s recognition memory for the eight pieces of 
evidence leading to a serial killer (multiple choice 
questions). Again, there were no differences across 
conditions.
Table 1 shows the correlations of measures on the pairs. 
These allow us to examine across all conditions whether 
visualization-related communication is associated with 
collaborative success. The table shows that, overall, when 
pairs identified the serial killer, they also had 
communicated more about the serial killer and talked more 
about the visualization. Active use of the visualization tool 
was not directly associated with communication; this result 
could be due to partners’ opening their visualization 
window once and then moving to talk and to view 
documents.
Individual and Collaborative Performance
We first examined performance on the simple problem— 
the Raffield homicide. We did not ask pairs to solve this 
case, but about one-third of the pairs did so anyway. We 
believe they did so in part because it was an easy way to get 
something done when the pair had trouble identifying the
serial killer. Consistent with this argument, the correlation 
between identifying the serial killer and solving the Raffield 
homicide was r = -.20. There were no differences across 
conditions solving the Raffield homicide, suggesting that 
having a visualization tool does not influence performance 
on a simple problem.
We next examined individual performance on the serial 
killer case. According to our arguments, if visualization 
improves individual performance then that improvement 
might translate into a greater likelihood of collaborative 
success. Because the dependent variable, solving the serial 
killer, is a discrete variable, the appropriate analysis is a 
logistic regression [16]. This regression assesses whether 
visualization conditions predict the dichotomous outcome 
(identified the serial killer or not). The logistic regression 
analyses at the individual level showed a highly significant 
influence of condition on whether individuals identified the 
serial killer (logistic regression Likelihood Ratio x2 = 12.1, 
p &lt; .01, df = 3, 93) with the No Visualization condition 
different from the other conditions (x2 = 5.75, p = .01).
We predicted in Hypothesis 1 that using a visualization tool 
would increase collaborative performance over 
performance in the control condition. We defined 
collaborative success when both members of the pair 
reached consensus and correctly identified the serial killer. 
We conducted analyses at the pair level, whose results are 
shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Percent of pairs solving the serial killer task by
condition.
Pairs in all three visualization conditions outperformed 
pairs in the No Visualization condition, as predicted. Only 
7.7% (SE = 12.7) of pairs in the No Visualization condition 
identified the serial killer, whereas 50% (SE = 14.5) of pairs 
in the Unshared Visualization condition, 33.3% (SE = 13.2) 
of pairs in the Shared View Only Visualization condition, 
and 58% (SE = 13.2) of pairs in the Shared Full Access 
Visualization condition identified the serial killer (logistic 
regression Likelihood Ratio x2 = 9, p &lt; .05, df = 3, 46). 
Student’s t tests revealed significant differences at the p &lt;
100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0	
No Vis. Unshared Shared Shared Full 
Vis.	View Only Access Vis.
Vis.
Visualization Condition
1232
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
.05 level between the two best conditions—Full Access 
Visualization and Unshared Visualizations versus the No 
Visualization controls.
To test whether visualization helped the collaboration over 
and above the help it gave individual members of each pair, 
we conducted a nominal pairs analysis [43]. For this 
analysis, we compared actual problem solving success of 
each pair in each condition with the simulated success of all 
possible other pairs in the same condition. The idea here 
was to compare these nominal (in name only) pairs with the 
actual pairs, to evaluate the extent to which collaboration 
really mattered when visualization was given to pairs. The 
results of this analysis can be seen in Figure 3. They show 
that, controlling for condition, performance was worse by 
nominal pairs than by actual pairs (logistic regression 
Likelihood Ratio x2 = 3.04, p = .08). In nominal pairs, the 
top mean performance in the Shared Full Access 
Visualization condition was only 48% (SE = 14.4). These 
analyses indicate that although visualizations aided 
individuals, collaborative performance was superior and 
benefited from using the visualization tool.
The results support Hypothesis 1 and show that 
visualization increases collaborative performance but the 
comparatively weak performance of the pairs in the Shared 
View-Only Visualization condition suggests that features of 
the tool do matter. The next section delves into the 
different tool use and communication in the three 
visualization conditions, and tests of Hypotheses 2 and 3.
Visualization Tool Use and Communication
We predicted that access to a visualization tool would 
increase remote pair performance in complex problem 
solving when this access increased information sharing and 
discussion by the pair (Hypothesis 2). The first step was to 
establish that participants with access to the visualization 
tool actually used it. They did. In the No Visualization 
condition, on average, participants spent 2.7 minutes with 
the spreadsheet selected. By contrast, in the Visualization 
conditions, participants on average spent 5.7 minutes with 
the network diagram opened (F [3, 43] = 4.1, p = .01, d = 
.63). Pairs in the two Shared Visualization conditions used 
the visualization tool more than did the pairs in the 
Unshared Visualization condition (F [2, 44] = 3.36, p &lt; 
0.05, d = .57). As shown in Figure 4, Shared View-Only 
Visualization pairs used the visualization tool the most (M 
= 6.84 minutes, SE = 1.02), followed by Shared Full Access 
Visualization pairs (M = 5.14 minutes, SE = 0.89), and then 
Unshared Visualization pairs (M = 2.83 minutes, SE = 
0.54). A contrast revealed that this difference was 
significant when comparing both shared conditions against 
the unshared condition (F [1, 30] = 6.37, p &lt; 0.05, d = .69). 
These results indicate that access to shared visualizations 
does encourage tool use.
Hypothesis 3 stated that the Shared Full Access 
Visualization would promote discussion and joint problem 
solving. We thus tested whether the participants in the
Visualization conditions, particularly in the Shared Full 
Access condition communicated differently than those in 
the other conditions. We found no overall effect on the total 
amount of IM conversation in the pairs, but a significant 
effect on talking about the network diagram versus the 
spreadsheet (F [3, 43] = 2.8, p &lt; .05, d = .52; see Figure 5).
Figure 3. Percent of actual and nominal pairs solving the serial
killer task, by condition.
Figure 4. Mean number of minutes during which participants
had the visualization selected, by condition.
Figure 5. Mean percent of total IM lines during which pairs
discussed the visualization, by condition.
Actual pairs 
Nominal pairs
100
90
80
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0
No Vis.	Unshared	Shared Shared Full
Vis.	View Only Access Vis.
Vis.
Visualization Condition
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
No Vis. Unshared Shared
Vis.	View Only
Vis.
Shared Full 
Access Vis.
Visualization Condition
12
10
4
8
6
2
0
No Vis. Unshared Shared Shared Full 
Vis.	View Only Access Vis.
Vis.
Visualization Condition
1233
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
According to a Student’s t test, pairs in the Shared Full 
Access Visualization condition talked significantly more 
about the network diagram (9% of IM lines) than did pairs 
in the other Visualization conditions. (5% of IM lines) or 
pairs (talking about the spreadsheet) in the No Visualization 
condition (&lt;1% of IM lines).
How was talking about the visualization relevant to 
identifying the serial killer? To examine this question, we 
looked at whether those who identified the serial killer 
talked differently with their partners than those who did not 
in the three Visualization conditions. (Because we did not 
manipulate communication directly, these are correlational 
analyses.) The analyses showed interesting relationships: 
Across the three Visualization conditions, controlling for 
condition, the higher the percentage of pair discussion 
about the network diagram, the higher was the percentage 
of discussion about the serial killer (F [1, 30] = 7.9, p &lt; .01, 
d = 1.1). The more pairs discussed the serial killer, the more 
likely they were to identify the serial killer (logistic 
regression Likelihood Ratio x2 = 6.2, p &lt; .05). These 
analyses point to the visualization as a contributor of 
solutions to the complex serial killer case.
DISCUSSION
We studied the impact of a shared visualization tool on 
difficult collaborative problem solving (overall, even after 
one hour, only 36% of pairs solved the case 
collaboratively). The visualization tool made a significant 
difference, improving not only individual performance, but 
also collaboration.
Although differences among the tools tended to be 
overshadowed by the positive impact of having any 
visualization at all, the Shared View-Only Visualization 
was comparatively unhelpful. That is, having full 
manipulable access to the shared visualization (Shared Full 
Access Visualization condition) encouraged pairs to use the 
tool and fostered more discussion and better performance— 
58% of the pairs solved the serial killer case. By contrast, 
when pairs had a tool that gave shared views but no ability 
to manipulate others’ data (Shared View-Only Visualization 
condition), there was a dip in performance—only 33.3% of 
pairs solved the serial killer case.
We wondered if the mere awareness of the partner’s 
visualization (but no ability to manipulate it) was a 
distraction to these pairs, explaining why mere awareness 
was worse than not seeing the partner’s view at all 
(Unshared Visualization condition). A decade ago, Gutwin 
and Greenberg [11] proposed that collaborative systems 
involve “mixed focus” whereby individuals must attend to 
their own work and to that of others. They analyzed a 
groupware concept map editor, showing that the tradeoffs 
of a shared view may include less individual flexibility and 
more attention to coordinating with others, detracting from 
accuracy.
Overall, we did not see that tradeoff. In the Visualization 
conditions, those who solved the problem actually spent
less time on task, whereas in the No Visualization 
condition, solving the case was correlated r = +.15 with 
time spent. Discussion was positively correlated with 
solving the case in the two best visualization conditions (r = 
.50) and negatively correlated with time spent problem 
solving (r = -.45). Talk was uncorrelated with solving the 
case in the less effective Shared View Only condition. We 
can only speculate, but possibly, when each member of the 
pair had his or her own visualization and could only stare at 
the other person’s diagram and manipulations, the tradeoff 
proposed by Gutwin and Greenberg prevailed. 
Alternatively, the two nonintegrated diagrams of data might 
have violated the “proximity compatibility” principle of 
display design [42], and confused pair members.
Our study is a step in the direction of understanding how 
visualizations can aid collaboration. Our nominal pair 
analysis (see Figure 3) showed that real collaboration was 
valuable on this task but we do not know exactly how pairs 
came to aid one another, for example, whether they formed 
a common mental model of the problem [8, 26] or whether 
they simply tried harder because the visualization was fun 
and motivating [40]. Future research will be needed to 
study these potential consequences of the use of 
collaborative visualization tools. How joint representations 
are created, perceived and given meaning is still being 
explored and understood as different from linguistic and 
gestural cognitive processing [5, 6, 44].
Limitations
This study cannot be generalized now to other genres of 
visualization tools, to other task types (such as decision 
making), or to other remote collaborative settings. For 
example, sharing information through IM may have 
introduced barriers to the effective flow of information or 
made visualizations particularly effective in a way they 
would not otherwise be effective. Previous studies have 
shown that IM provides an effective channel of 
communication between partners [e.g., 31] but an audio 
chat feature could help us understand the role of different 
channels in the use of visualization tools.
Participants were all given predrawn social network 
diagrams. One might argue that taking a more active role in 
creating the diagram would aid pairs in understanding their 
data [37]. However, a recent trend in using social network 
diagrams for analysis is to use diagrams automatically 
generated from an existing dataset. Oftentimes the datasets 
have millions of different records from which diagrams are 
produced, so a real challenge is how to engage users in 
helping to create them.
This study examined synchronous interactions. In 
distributed teams, colleagues often do not work 
simultaneously. Asynchronous collaborative visualizations 
can encourage to knowledge discovery [13]. Asynchronous 
communication and access to the information visualization 
tools would be most similar to our Unshared Visualization 
condition. Pairs did quite well in this condition (50%
1234
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
solution rate). Thus our findings suggest that asynchronous 
teams would benefit from the use of such tools to solve 
complex problems.
Design Implication
This study has just one main implication for designing tools 
for complex problem solving—that is, create a visualization 
tool. Our study also suggests that, for most effective 
collaboration, visualization tools should have the capability 
of being jointly manipulated and should facilitate the 
integration of data from different collaborators.
CONCLUSION
Information visualization in the form of a network diagram 
aided both individual and collaborative complex problem 
solving. Real collaboration improved the performance of 
pairs over statistical pairings, particularly if pairs (a) had an 
integrated visualization that both could manipulate, and (b) 
when pairs discussed the visualizations they received. 
Doing so led to more relevant discussion of evidence and 
higher solution rates.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Science 
Foundation Grant IIS-0325047. We thank Peter Scupelli 
and Gail Kusbit for their assistance in developing 
experiment materials.
REFERENCES
1. Andrews, K., &amp; Heidegger, H. (1998). Information 
Slices: Visualization and Exploring Large Hierarchies 
using Cascading, Semi-Circular Discs. Proc.
Information Visualization 1998. NJ: IEEE press.
2. Ariely, D. (2000). Controlling the information flow: 
Effects on consumers’ decision making and preferences. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 27, 233-248.
3. Baron, R. A. (2006). Opportunity recognition as pattern 
recognition: How entrepreneurs “connect the dots” to 
identify new business opportunities. Academy of 
Management Perspectives, 20(1), 104-119.
4. Billman, D., Convertino, G., Pirolli, P., Massar, J. P. and 
Shrager, J. (2005). Collaborative intelligence analysis 
with CACHE: Bias reduction and information coverage. 
Unpublished manuscript. Palo Alto Research Center, 
CA. Retrieved from 
http://cscl.ist.psu.edu/public/users/gconvert/mypapers/hc 
ic2006_BillmanEtAl.pdf.
5. Cheng, P., Lowe, R., &amp; Scaife, M. (2001). Cognitive 
Science Approaches To Understanding Diagrammatic 
Representations. Artificial Intelligence Review, 15(1), 
79-94.
6. Clancey, William J. (1994). Situated cognition: How 
representations are created and given meaning. In 
Lewis, R. and Mendelsohn, P. (Eds.), Lessons from 
Learning (pp. 231-242). Amsterdam: North Holland.
7. Edelson, D., Pea, R., Gomez, L. (1996). Constructive in 
the Collaboratory. In B.G. Wilson (Ed.), Constructivist 
Learning Environments: Case Studies in Instructional
Design. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology 
Publications.
8. Fiore, S., Salas, E., Cuevas, H., &amp; Bowers, C. (2003). 
Distributed coordination space: toward a theory of 
distributed team process and performance. Theoretical 
Issues in Ergonomics Science, 4(3), 340-364.
9. Fraidin, S. N. (2004). When is one head better than two? 
Interdependent information in group decision making. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 93(2), 102-113.
10. Fredericks, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision 
making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 25-42.
11. Gutwin, C., &amp; Greenberg, S. (1998). Design for 
individuals, design for groups: Tradeoffs btween power 
and workspace awareness (pp. 207-216). Proceedings of 
the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW ’98), Washington, D.C. NY: ACM Press.
12. Hart, S. G., &amp; Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of 
a multi-dimensional workload rating scale: Results of 
empirical and theoretical research. In P. A. Hancock &amp; 
N. Meshkati (Ed.), Human mental workload (pp. 139- 
183). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
13. Heer, J., Viegas, F. B., &amp; Wattenberg, M. (2007). 
Voyagers and voyeurs: Supporting asynchronous 
collaborative information visualization. Proc. CHI 2007 
(pp. 1029-1038), NY: ACM press.
14. Hendrix, T. D., James H. Cross, I. I., Maghsoodloo, S., 
&amp; McKinney, M. L. (2000). Do visualizations improve 
program comprehensibility? Experiments with control 
structure diagrams for Java. SIGCSE Bulletin, 32(1), 
382-386.
15. Hill, G. (1982). Group versus individual performance: 
Are N+ 1 heads better than one. Psychological Bulletin, 
91(3), 517-539.
16. Hosmer, D. W., &amp; Lemeshow, S. (1989). Applied 
Logistic Regression. NY: John Wiley &amp; Sons.
17. Huerer, Jr., R. J. (1999). The psychology of intelligence. 
Washington DC: Center for the Study of Intelligence, 
Government Printing Office.
18. Johnston, R. (2005). Analytic culture in the U.S. 
intelligence community: An ethnographic study. 
Washington DC: Center for the Study of Intelligence, 
Government Printing Office.
19. Klahr, D., &amp; Simon, H. A. (1999). Studies of scientific 
creativity: Complementary approaches and convergent 
findings. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 524-543.
20. Kraut, R. E., Fussell, S. R., Brennan, S. E., &amp; Siegel, J. 
(2002). Understanding effects of proximity on 
collaboration: Implications for technologies to support 
remote collaborative work. In P. Hinds &amp; S. Kiesler 
(Eds.), Distributed work, 137-162. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
1235
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
21. Larkin, J., &amp; Simon, H. (1987). Why a Diagram is 
(Sometimes) Worth Ten Thousand Words. Cognitive 
Science, 11(1), 65-100.
22. Lavery, T., Franz, T., Winquist, J., &amp; Larson, J. (1999). 
The Role of Information Exchange in Predicting Group 
Accuracy on a Multiple Judgment Task. Basic and 
Applied Social Psychology, 21(4), 281-289.
23. Mark, G., Carpenter, K., &amp; Kobsa, A. (2003a). Are 
There Benefits in Seeing Double? A Study of 
Collaborative Information Visualization. Proc. CHI 
2004 (pp. 840-841), NY: ACM Press.
24. Mark, G., Carpenter, K., &amp; Kobsa, A. (2003b). A model 
of synchronous collaborative information visualization. 
Proc. Information Visualization 2003 (pp. 373-381), 
NJ: IEEE Press.
25. Mark, G., Kobsa, A., &amp; Gonzalez, V. (2002). Do four 
eyes see better than two? Collaborative versus
individual discovery in data visualization systems. Proc. 
Information Visualization 2002 (pp. 249-255), NJ: IEEE 
Press.
26. Mohammed, S., &amp; Dumville, B. (2001). Team mental 
models in a team knowledge framework: expanding 
theory and measurement across disciplinary boundaries. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 22(2), 89-106.
27. Monk, A. (2003). Common ground in electronically 
mediated communication: Clark’s theory of language 
use. In J.M. Carroll (Ed.), HCI Models, Theories and 
Frameworks: Towards a Multidisiplinary Science (pp. 
265-289). San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
28. Pang, A., &amp; Wittenbrink, C. (1997). Collaborative 3D 
visualization with CSpray. Computer Graphics and 
Applications, 17(2), 32-41.
29. Ryall, K., Forlines, C., Shen, C., &amp; Morris, M. (2004).
Exploring the effects of group size and table size on
interactions with tabletop shared-display groupware.
Proc. CSCW 2004 (pp. 284-293). NY: ACM press.
30. Safarik, M. E., Jarvis, J., &amp; Nussbaum, K. (2000). 
Elderly female serial sexual homicide. Homicide 
Studies, 4, 294-307.
31. Scupelli, P., Kiesler, S., Fussell, S.R., &amp; Chen, C. 
(2005). Project view IM: a tool for juggling multiple 
projects and teams. Proc. CHI 2005 (pp. 1773-1776). 
NY: ACM Press.
32. Shneiderman, Ben. (1996). The eyes have it: A task by 
data type taxonomy for information visualizations. Proc. 
Visual Languages 1996 (pp. 336–343). NJ: IEEE Press.
33. Simonton, D. K. (2003). Scientific creativity as 
constrained stochastic behavior: The integration of 
product, person, and process perspectives.
Psychological Bulletin, 129, 475-494.
34. Stasko, J., Catrambone, R., Guzdial, M., &amp; McDonald, 
K. (2000). An evaluation of space-filling information 
visualizations for depicting hierarchical structures. 
International Journal of Human Computer Studies, 
53(5), 663-694.
35. Stasser, G., &amp; Titus, W. (1987). Effects of information 
load and percentage of shared information on the 
dissemination of unshared information during group 
discussion. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 53(1), 81-93.
36. State of North Carolina v. Henry Louis Wallace, 2000. 
URL: 
www.aoc.state.nc.us/www/public/sc/opinions/2000/241- 
97-1.htm. Downloaded June 16, 2007.
37. Suthers, D., &amp; Hundhausen, C. (2001). Learning by 
Constructing Collaborative Representations: An 
Empirical Comparison of Three Alternatives. Proc. 
Euro CSCL 2001 (pp. 577-592). Maastricht, the 
Netherlands: Maastricht McLuhan Institute.
38. Tolcott, M. A., Marvin, F. F., and Bresoick, T. A. 
(1989). The confirmation bias in military situation 
assessment. Reston, VA: Decision Science Consortium.
39. Veerasamy, A., &amp; Belkin, N. (1996). Evaluation of a 
tool for visualization of information retrieval results. 
Proc. SIGIR 1996 (pp. 85-92). NY: ACM Press.
40. Viégas, F., Wattenberg, M., &amp; Dave, K. (2004). 
Studying cooperation and conflict between authors with 
history flow visualizations. Proc. CHI 2004 (pp. 575- 
582). NY: ACM Press.
41. Wattenberg, M. (1999). Visualizing the stock market. 
Proc. CHI 1999 (pp. 188-189). NY: ACM Press.
42. Wickens, C. D., &amp; Carswell, C. M. (1995). The 
proximity compatibility principle: Its psychological 
foundation and its relevance to display design. Human 
Factors, 37, 473-494.
43. Wright, D.B. (2007). Calculating nominal group 
statistics in collaboration studies. Behavior Research 
Methods, 39, 460-470.
44. Zhang, J., &amp; Norman, D. (1994). Representations in 
Distributed Cognitive Tasks. Cognitive Science, 18(1), 
87-122.
1236
