CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Don’t Look Now, But We’ve Created a Bureaucracy:
The Nature and Roles of Policies and Rules
in Wikipedia
Brian Butler
Katz Graduate School of
Business, University of
Pittsburgh
bbutler@katz.pitt.edu
Elisabeth Joyce
Edinboro University of
Pennsylvania
ejoyce@edinboro.edu
Jacqueline Pike
Katz Graduate School of
Business, University of
Pittsburgh
jpike@katz.pitt.edu
ABSTRACT
Wikis are sites that support the development of emergent, 
collective infrastructures that are highly flexible and open, 
suggesting that the systems that use them will be 
egalitarian, free, and unstructured. Yet it is apparent that 
the flexible infrastructure of wikis allows the development 
and deployment of a wide range of structures. However, we 
find that the policies in Wikipedia and the systems and 
mechanisms that operate around them are multi-faceted. In 
this descriptive study, we draw on prior work on rules and 
policies in organizations to propose and apply a conceptual 
framework for understanding the natures and roles of 
policies in wikis. We conclude that wikis are capable of 
supporting a broader range of structures and activities than 
other collaborative platforms. Wikis allow for and, in fact, 
facilitate the creation of policies that serve a wide variety of 
functions.
Author Keywords
Wikis, Wikipedia, community, collaboration, policy, 
policies, rules, dynamics.
ACM Classification Keywords
K.4.3. [Computers and Society]: Organizational Impact – 
Computer-supported collaborative work, H.5.3 
[Information Interfaces]: Group and Organization Interfaces 
- Collaborative computing, Web-based interaction, 
Computer-supported cooperative work, H.3.5 [Information 
Storage and Retrieval]: Online Information Systems.
INTRODUCTION
“The Wikipedia online encyclopedia — written by 
thousands of individuals working without a boss – shows 
the way... ” [28]
Wikipedia is characterized by many as emergent, complex,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00 
messy, informal, popularly uncontrolled, non-
organizational, and radically different from traditional 
organizations [5, 11, 22, 42, 52, 53]. Consistent with this 
characterization, one of the founding principles of 
Wikipedia is “Ignore all rules,” which states that if a rule 
inhibits developing Wikipedia, the contributor should 
ignore it [45].
Yet examination of the administrative structures of 
Wikipedia reveals a complex structure of rules, processes, 
policies, and roles. There are 44 wiki pages in the 
“Wikipedia Official Policy” category as of September 
20071. There are 248 wiki pages categorized as “Wikipedia 
guidelines” which are organized into at least eight 
subcategories. In addition, these do not seem to be 
sufficient, since there are 45 pending proposals for 
guidelines and policies, not to mention the 200 rejected 
proposals for guidelines and policies.
Even the principle of “Ignore all rules,” labeled as one of 
the official Wikipedia policies, is not immune from such 
“development” [45]. While the “Ignore all rules” policy 
itself is only sixteen words long, the page explaining what 
the policy means contains over 500 words, refers readers to 
seven other documents, has generated over 8,000 words of 
discussion, and has been changed over 100 times in less 
than a year.
Studies of Wikipedia activities [5, 11, 42, 43] and 
anecdotal discussions among participants [49] suggest that 
these policies, rules, and guidelines play an important part 
in both the day-to-day operations and overall success of 
Wikipedia. These arguments are consistent with findings 
and arguments made with regard to other types of online 
collective action, such as online communities [19, 24, 32], 
open source development [15, 16, 26, 41, 44], and virtual 
organizations [1].
The purpose of this study is to propose a conceptual 
framework for understanding the nature and role of policies 
and rules within wikis. Drawing from prior studies of rules
1 All references to Wikipedia content are based on data 
exported from the site in September 2007. Since the 
policies undergo perpetual re-editing and reconfiguring, the 
data presented here represents a snap-shot.
1101
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
and policies in a variety of contexts, including teams, 
traditional organizations, and legal systems [29], different 
images of rules and policies are considered. In each case, 
examples and evidence are drawn from Wikipedia to 
illustrate that view of rules and policies. Following this we 
discuss the implications of the framework for understanding 
both the potential and likely outcomes of wiki efforts and 
design implications of the different perspectives for both 
wiki implementation and development of infrastructures for 
supporting wiki-like initiatives.
RULES, POLICIES AND GUIDELINES
In the broadest scope, terms like rules, policies, and 
guidelines all refer to the “explicit and implicit norms, 
regulations, and expectations that regulate the behavior of 
individuals and interactions between them” [29 p. 5]. 
Taken in its most general sense, this definition can also be 
seen as including informal or implicit norms and constraints 
that can significantly affect behavior and interaction, even 
though they are not formally recognized or recorded.
Given the widely discussed importance of informal norms 
in contexts such as open source projects [35, 41] and other 
online social settings [3, 4], it may be beneficial to equate 
formal and informal rules. In particular this approach 
suggests that insights and results from the study of explicit, 
formal rules and policies may be useful for understanding 
the development, application, and impact of informal rules 
and norms. However, in this study we focus on formal, or 
written, policies, rules, and guidelines.
We use the terms rules, policies, and guidelines 
interchangeably. While there are some contexts in which 
these are clearly conceptually distinguishable, the 
difference between and application of the terms vary from 
context to context. This suggests that while some aspects 
require distinguishing them from each other, there is not 
ready agreement on what they are or how the terms should 
be used. Furthermore, and for our purposes perhaps more 
importantly, this conceptual equivalence is reflected in the 
Wikipedia definitions which state:
“A guideline is any page that is: (1) actionable (i.e. it 
recommends, or recommends against, an action to be taken 
by editors) and (2) authorized by consensus. Guidelines are 
not set in stone and should be treated with common sense 
and the occasional exception.
A policy is similar to a guideline, only more official and 
less likely to have exceptions.” [48]
This study focuses on formal written policies for both 
practical and conceptual reasons. Practically, formal rules 
are ideal for study because of the relative ease of 
determining what the policy is, when it was put in place, 
who participated in creating it, when it was referenced, and, 
in some cases, when it was removed. This is particularly 
true in the context of a wiki because of its facilities for 
archiving and managing collaborative documents.
However, beyond the practical issues, formal written rules 
and policies are significant because of their role as 
boundary objects [33, 34], or as specifications of how the 
content will be used and communication will occur. They 
can serve a variety of purposes by virtue of the fact that 
they are explicit and external. Because they are explicit and 
visible, though, written policies and rules are often sites of 
conflict [29 p. 18]. These same characteristics also mean 
that written policies have greater potential as levers for 
developers, designers, and managers to affect a community 
or collaborative effort [10, 19].
Hence, while it may be the case that informal norms are 
important, it makes sense to focus on the nature and role of 
formal written rules and policies in the operation of a 
distributed collaborative effort like Wikipedia.
IMAGES AND ROLES OF RULES AND POLICIES 
Because of their centrality in so many aspects of society 
and organizational and individual behaviors, rules and 
policies have been studied by scholars in a wide variety of 
fields, including law, sociology, political science, 
economics, management science, anthropology, linguistics, 
and organizational studies. While these scholars typically 
adopt definitions similar to those described above, the 
assumptions they make about the source, nature, and 
implications of rules and policies can vary significantly.
While this lack of consensus can present challenges, it also 
provides a basis for characterizing the multifaceted nature 
of rules, policies, and guidelines.
In particular, prior work provides several perspectives 
which can be used to view rules and policies, including 
rules and policies as:
•	Rational efforts to organize and coordinate
•	Evolving, competing entities
•	Constructions of meaning &amp; identity
•	External signals
•	Internal signals
•	Negotiated settlements and trophies
•	Control mechanisms
In the following sections, we consider each of these 
perspectives. For each one we begin with a discussion of 
the core assumptions that are made about the nature and 
implications of policies playing this role with reference to 
principles and examples drawn from studies of rules in 
traditional organizational and social contexts. We then 
consider examples from Wikipedia that illustrate how the 
policies and guidelines there are consistent with the 
perspective.
The purpose of these discussions and examples is to 
illustrate how the guidelines and policies in Wikipedia, and 
the systems and mechanisms that operate around them, are 
multi-faceted. As such, these perspectives should not be
1102
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 2. Wikipedia 
Guideline Box
treated as a set of mutually exclusive categories, but rather 
as a set of potentially overlapping lenses, each of which 
highlights different aspects of the policies and guidelines 
that exist within Wikipedia.
Rules and Policies as Rational Efforts to Organize or 
Coordinate
All groups are faced with challenges created by 
communication and coordination problems which must be 
solved if the shared objectives are to be achieved [7, 13, 14, 
21, 38, 41]. In this view rules are conscious, intentional 
actions put in place for the purpose of improving collective 
performance. Rules and policies address, or at least 
substantially increase the chance of addressing, the 
problems of communication and coordination by creating a 
context in which distributed actions are taken in reliable 
and consistent ways [27]. In other words, rules and policies 
are means of solving communication and coordination 
problems by increasing the reliability and consistency of 
action (i.e., eliminating the need to explicitly communicate 
and coordinate) [29]. Rules in this role assume that all 
parties have the same motivations and goals.
Rules and policies for coordination and communication 
have been identified as particularly important in contexts 
where there is high turnover (people coming and going on a 
regular basis), where there is substantial autonomy of 
action, and where explicit coordination is costly and yet 
important to success of the activity [9, 25].
Rational Efforts to Organize or Coordinate in Wikipedia 
Wikipedia has high turnover in that a large majority of the 
editors make only a few changes once, the editors are 
distributed globally, and coordination is necessary in order 
to continuously provide a functioning product (i.e., an 
encyclopedia) on demand.
For Wikipedia, this perspective 
on rules and policies suggests 
that policies and guidelines are 
being put in place to achieve 
consistency and reliability in 
terms of how things are 
handled and coordinate efforts 
[23], but also to confirm the 
authority of those most likely 
to implement the policies: the 
administrators. For example, a 
policy was created which 
outlines the process which 
should be taken to block a user 
or delete an entry in 
Wikipedia. The 48 policies 
under consideration on the 
Wikipedia Policy proposals 
indicate the administrators’ continual need to reinforce their 
limited power over the dispersed population of this 
community.
Because of the decentralized 
nature of the role of user (i.e., 
editor) in Wikipedia and the high 
turnover, more written policies 
and guidelines are needed to 
facilitate the transfer of 
knowledge [40] from one user to 
the next and maintain 
consistency during the editing. 
Alternatively, fewer policies will 
be specified for administrators 
than users. There are more 
rules, therefore, for editors, since 
their population experiences 
greater turnover and their 
activities are more dispersed 
than those of the administrators 
[13, 14]. Also, since this 
population gains members more 
frequently than the 
administrators, written policies 
assist new people by lending 
them direction with their 
contributions, in a similar 
fashion as Frequently asked 
questions pages in online 
communities [6].
Most policy and guideline pages 
provide a box with general 
information about Wikipedia 
policy or guidelines, 
respectively, in the prominent 
upper right hand corner, as 
shown in Figures 1 and 2. The 
policies selected for emphasis 
are divided into two sections: 
one discussing procedures for 
editing articles and the other 
reminding users about 
behavioral standards.
These boxes serve to introduce first time participants to the 
norms of the hybrid community/document paradigm and 
remind more experienced and committed members about 
the essential rules. After all, according to the Wikipedia 
contributors, these policies and guidelines help make 
Wikipedia successful [48]. Also, since the items in these 
lists are links, they point readily to the written document for 
each of these policies.
Wikipedia editors suggest that policy is often enacted after 
it has been used in practice and recognized as important 
[48], such as to increase the speed, efficiency, or reduce the 
cost of administering the encyclopedia. These enactments 
embody the rational efforts of this role of a policy or 
guideline.
Figure 1. Wikipedia 
Policy Box
1103
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
A case where a process was “policy-fied” to accomplish 
these goals is the policy outlining the Criteria for Speedy 
Deletion [50]. The deletion policy is written exclusively for 
administrators, for they are the only community members 
empowered to determine what pages should remain in 
Wikipedia and what pages should be removed. This policy 
is written in extensive form and with multiple categorized 
subsections to accommodate the autonomy of the 
administrators and to support consistency in their decision 
making. Written policies of this sort ensure coordination 
among administrators and prevent arbitrary decisions. 
Additionally, written policies establish guidelines for 
behavior so that each decision does not require the endless 
time expense of lengthy discussion and consensus 
development.
Implications for Rational Efforts to Organize or Coordinate 
Wikipedia policies and guidelines can be seen as intentional 
efforts to solve coordination and communication problems 
by either eliminating the need for direct coordination or 
communication or significantly reducing the costs of such 
communication. Reduction of costs is often achieved by 
codifying the interaction, and hence, reducing the effort 
needed to engage in the exchanges. These mechanisms 
remain important even though communication and 
coordination costs are lower (at least theoretically) because 
of the technology infrastructure due to issues such as 
information overload [17]. At least for large scale wikis, 
such as Wikipedia, the need for organizational mechanisms 
to reduce communication and coordination cost remains.
Rules and Policies as Evolving, Competing, Self- 
propagating Entities
Rules can be seen as self-propagating entities that are the 
result of an evolving, competitive process. This perspective 
rejects the idea of intention, design, and agency as the 
primary drivers of policy development, largely because of 
the bounded rationality of individuals and high levels of 
complexity in the organizational system. Instead it is 
argued that rules are the result of competition for shifting 
attention. This results in systems of policies in which 
dynamics of rule development have the following features:
•	Rules generate more rules (either exponentially, linearly, 
or at a declining rate)
•	Areas or problems can be saturated, so modification or
adaptation of rules will drop off as the space gets 
“populated”
•	Developing manner rules in one area will draw attention
and people from other areas [29]
Evolving, Competing, Self-propagating Entities in Wikipedia 
For Wikipedia, the basic conditions of this perspective 
definitely apply. Wikipedia is an extremely complex system 
of documents, people, roles, policies and guidelines, yet 
individuals possess bounded rationality [39]. This suggests 
that we should see these kinds of dynamics of rules in the 
formation and modifications of the policies and guidelines 
in Wikipedia, and the archives bear this out.
One useful measure of increased complexity is the change 
in lengths in terms of word count alone of the policies from 
the first version to most current. All policies studied grew 
enormously.
•	Copyrights: 341 words 4 3200 words: 938%
•	What Wikipedia is not: 541 words 4 5031 words: 929%
•	Civility: 1741 words 4 2131 words: 124%
•	Consensus: 132 words 4 2054 words: 1557%
•	Deletion: 405 words 4 2349 words: 580%
•	Ignore all rules: exceptional case
The first version of the Ignore all rules policy is only 23 
words long, stating, “If rules make you nervous and 
depressed, and not desirous of participating in the Wiki, 
then ignore them and go about your business” [45]. The 
current version is actually shorter, only 16 words, and says, 
“If a rule prevents you from working with others to improve 
or maintain Wikipedia, ignore it” [45]. However, as 
suggested earlier in this paper, while the actual wording of 
this policy declined 69% and it appears on the surface to be 
the least bureaucratic of the policies, the supplemental page 
directly linked to this policy contains 579 words, indicating 
that the policy swelled over 3600% [45].
The Deletion policy appears to grow less than most of the 
other policies, but this statistic is misleading as the deletion 
policy is continually broken down into smaller 
subcategories in order to prevent discussion of particular 
instances of deletion decisions from appearing on the 
general policy page. The Deletion policy, therefore, is a 
policy of tremendous proliferation and complication.
Increased complexity is apparent in the Copyrights policy, 
among others, where the diction and syntax emulate that of 
legal documents. The first version of the policy, for 
instance, starts with: “The goal of Wikipedia is to create 
information that is available to everyone.” The current 
version, starting after a disclaimer note, begins: “The 
license Wikipedia uses grants free access to our content in 
the same sense as free software is licensed freely.” The 
earlier version uses simple sentence construction and 
vernacular diction. The current one relies on words from the 
legal profession, such as license, grants, access, and later in 
the policy, permission, obligation, rights.
Implications for Evolving, Competing, Self-propagating 
Entities
This role of rules and policies is necessary because it 
attempts to take the complex system that is Wikipedia and 
make it manageable. The evolutionary aspect of this role 
also promotes the continuous updating and modification of 
rules, which is needed in this type of dynamic environment.
Rules and Policies as Constructions of Meaning and 
Identity
Rules and policies answer questions about “who we are” 
[29]. They also indicate the way things “should be” (i.e., 
ideals). Lastly they serve to define and exemplify the “talk”
1104
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
of the place. Previous work has looked at the role of shared 
group and community identity [2, 12, 14] and individual 
identity [18, 30, 37] construction.
Constructions of Meaning and Identity in Wikipedia
For Wikipedia this includes policies that serve the purpose 
of defining what Wikipedia is and is not, either explicitly 
(e.g., What Wikipedia is not page) or through the 
articulation of policy pages on community principles (e.g., 
Ignore all rules page).
Meaning and identity are also likely to be reflected in 
discussions of policy changes that center on whether or not 
something is consistent with the “core principles” of 
Wikipedia. An example of these discussions is that which 
centers around the Neutral Point of View policy. This 
policy contains detailed definitions of bias, carefully 
organized guidelines for how to maintain neutrality in an 
article, and specifically outlined procedures for handling 
conflicts [51]. The archived discussion pages on this policy 
are so voluminous that many of them contain the 
discussions held within only one or two days [51].
The What Wikipedia is not policy sets up a clear sense of 
identity, but less through a description or definition of it 
(i.e., what we are) than through a negative approach. This 
policy is divided into three sections: Style and Format, 
Content, and Community. The first section differentiates 
Wikipedia from printed and published encyclopedias that 
are written by paid experts. The second section defines the 
term encyclopedia. The third one is perhaps the most 
illustrative of the identity of the group, however, for it lays 
out explicitly norms for community behavior, and for the 
purposes of this paper, “Wikipedia is not a bureaucracy” is 
the section most directed towards policy. Interestingly, it 
denies the bureaucratic nature of this organization: 
“Wikipedia is not a moot court, and rules are not the 
purpose of the community. Instruction creep should be 
avoided. A perceived procedural error made in posting 
anything, such as an idea or nomination, is not grounds for 
invalidating that post. Follow the spirit, not the letter, of 
any rules, policies and guidelines if you feel they conflict. If 
the rules prevent you from improving the encyclopedia, you 
should ignore them. Disagreements should be resolved 
through consensus-based discussion, rather than through 
tightly sticking to rules and procedures.”
The irony of this statement is that discussion surrounding 
policy development and modification turns to policy for 
support on a regular basis. The Three-revert rule policy, for 
instance, refers to the Copyrights, Spamming, Non-free 
content, Biographies of living persons, Blocking, and 
Consensus policies in its statement alone, with reference to 
those and other policies and guidelines proliferating 
through the discussion pages.
Implications for Constructions of Meaning and Identity
Rules in this role allow the wiki and its users to develop a 
sense of identity and meaning, which can be viewed, 
literally and figuratively, by new and current editors. These 
editors can then measure their fit with the community and 
decide on their intended level of participation. For 
example, someone looking for a wiki focused on social 
interaction may not be satisfied with one which focuses on 
purely identity formation [36]. In a volitional environment, 
such statement of meaning, values, and identity can become 
highly influential and rallying.
Rules and Policies as External Signals
Sometimes rules are ways of indicating to outside 
stakeholders or concerned parties that things that they care 
about are being attended to. The rules can be symbolic; can 
reflect action, or both. It is possible to discern these 
responses through media coverage of Wikipedia that 
provoked changes in policies or the creation of new ones.
External Signals in Wikipedia
For Wikipedia, the Copyrights policy illustrates a rule 
acting as an external signal. Based on an analysis of the 
Copyrights guidelines, it appears they were developed in 
response to external complaints or concerns about the 
unpermitted use of protected material [47]. It is perhaps 
because of this external stimulant that this policy’s 
discussion pages, while devoted extensively to copyright 
rules in general, often devolve into discussions of particular 
cases, especially those concerning images [47]. Also, 
perhaps because of the need to signal recognition of an 
issue by Wikipedia, this page developed from a simply 
stated list of rules into a more extensively organized but 
also more linguistically complicated treatise, as mentioned 
above. The language evolved from simple sentence 
structures and vernacular style into the more complicated 
grammars and dictions of the legal profession, possibly due 
to the hiring of general counsel [8], but also as the need for 
greater credibility and as a reflection of the community’s 
pressures to protect itself and its reputation from outside 
attacks or influences.
Another example of a policy acting as an external signal, or 
at least being heavily oriented toward external stakeholders, 
is the Biographies of living persons policy [46]. Notable 
characteristics of this policy include:
•	It includes full contact information for Jimmy Wales as 
the “Designated Agent” (which references specific 
requirement of US Law) unlike the other policies. It also 
includes a link to the Wikimedia Foundations Board of 
Trustees in a related readings section.
•	It explicitly references external legal structures
requirements (“Such material requires a high degree of 
sensitivity, and must adhere strictly to the law in Florida, 
United States and to our content policies”). The other
1105
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
policy that turns to this type of language is the Copyrights 
policy.
•	It uses very insistent language (“Editors must take 
particular care...”, “...must adhere strictly to...” 
(emphasis in original), or “We must get the article right” 
(emphasis in original)).
•	In internal discussions, explanations for the policy and
changes to the policy are described in the third person 
(they, them, he, her) not first person (we, us, I, me).
•	External attention triggers changes to the policy and
concerns of the external stakeholders are one of the 
factors referenced in discussions of the policy, such as a 
comment on the Biographies of living person page 
stating, “I started this due to the Daniel Brandt situation.”
•	The policy is referenced in statements to external
stakeholders and media.
While the Biography of living persons policy is an extreme 
case, which came about because of a very high level of 
external attention to a particular aspect of Wikipedia, other 
examples do exist, such as the sock-puppeting of external 
organizations that edit the content of the entries on them or 
the revelations that editors were not as qualified as they 
claimed.
Implications for External Signals
External signals serve the role of demonstrating that the 
wiki and its members recognize an issue as important or 
significant. However, doing this too often can weaken the 
impact or message that an external signal sends to the 
external audience. It is important to note that rules which 
act as external signals speak to external audiences and are 
not necessarily meant for internal audiences, or members. 
Theoretically, a rule which serves only as an external signal 
could be removes and not change the internal dynamic of 
the community.
Rules and Policies as Internal Signals
Policies and rules can be used to signal to the community 
what the community finds important, such as creating a 
policy about a particular issue or behavior which is 
significant to the community.
Internal Signals in Wikipedia
An example of a policy developed as an internal signal is 
the Civility policy. Its function is to promote polite 
interactions between members of the community, rather 
than to recognize or call significance to an issue for an 
external audience. Perhaps as a result of its role, this 
policy’s current form differs from its original form the least 
of all the policies and generates the fewest discussions or 
dissensions. Policies fitting into this category are not 
threatened by outside forces, so their language can remain 
less formal in contrast to rules acting as external signals. As 
such, they also will not serve as the foci of editorial 
pressures faced by those responding to external signals.
This policy also acts as an internal signal via its prominent 
placement on the list of policies for first-time users [48].
Implications for Internal Signals
Internal signals demonstrate values and identity to internal 
stakeholders. It is significant to note that while internal 
signals speak to the internal stakeholders, they can be 
triggered by either internal members (e.g. via complaints or 
problematic events) or external viewers.
Rules and Policies as Negotiated Settlements and 
Trophies
People have different interests or perspectives. Rules and 
policies are negotiated settlements or trophies. Settlements 
are creating to avoid the cost of continued conflict, while 
trophies are created to give credibility and influence to the 
“winner” in future discussions.
Negotiated Settlements and Trophies in Wikipedia
In Wikipedia, references to “that has already been decided” 
or references to policy changes as having been determined 
in one side’s favor or another reflect this perspective. An 
example of this “trophy” type situation occurs in the 
Consensus policy. As mentioned previously, extensive
Figure 3. Wikipedia consensus flowchart
1106
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
discussion surrounds the development of written guidelines 
to assist smooth negotiations and to achieve acceptable 
compromises. For the Consensus policy, this type of 
discussion focuses on whether to use specific numbers for 
confirmation of consensus or not. That is, should the group 
need 80% or 75% of the population’s approval? Or should 
the policy simply state that general agreement is all that is 
required for consensus? An active member wants polling 
results to determine consensus, but he “loses” this effort in 
2005; consensus is explained through the organizational 
structure of the flowchart in Figure 3. In July 2007, 
someone starts adding the numbers requirement back into 
the Consensus policy, and the administrators talk about it 
and remove it each time. In August, there is more 
discussion of consensus versus the supermajority, and then 
it appears that it might be the original participant who lost 
the battle who is adding the numbers back to the policy, and 
even if it is not, he is actively participating in discussions to 
bring back the “numbers” [49].
As an example of the discussion leading away from 
decisions through polling, one administrator says, “for all 
but uncontroversial trivial propositions, it is unusual for 
decisions on Wikipedia talk pages to operate on a true 
consensus. Instead they operate on a rough consensus 
where it is recognised that a minority are in opposition. The 
question then arises is how large must the majority be to 
ignore the opinions of a minority?” [49].
When the policy is revised to respect the majority of 
decision makers, the discussion is titled, “The numbers 
came back again.” The first comment reads, “So I removed 
them.” The response to it, by the “losing” contestant says, 
“Did you not read the section above? There is not 
consensus to remove them,” in an assertion that previous 
decisions support this, but the response to this remark is: “I 
have read the section above. There is clearly no consensus 
to include them. Stop adding them,” reinforcing the 
community’s adherence to “rough consensus” as opposed to 
numerically-based decision-making.
Implications for Negotiated Settlements and Trophies 
Policies, therefore, reflect a continuous process of battles 
engaged in and won or lost, so that no conclusion is 
achieved. Much discussion of these policies includes a 
continuous recycling of old fights and unresolved 
contentions.
Rules and Policies as Control Mechanisms
To complete tasks and meet goals, rules and policies are 
often written to act as control mechanisms. Control is 
defined as any effort made to ensure appropriate action 
[31]. In the systems development literature, control has 
been defined more specifically from the behavioral sense as 
attempts to ensure that individuals on a project team act in 
accordance with a previously agreed-upon strategy to 
accomplish desired goals and objectives [21]. Control 
mechanisms are “devices used by controllers to ensure
proper controllee behavior” [20]. Both formal and informal 
control modes rely on control mechanisms to influence 
behavior, but formal modes control via performance 
evaluation and rewards while informal modes control via 
socialization to reduce goal differences [20]. Wikis draw 
upon informal modes of control by writing policies which 
describe ideal work output or behavior.
Explicitly highlighting this role of rules and policies also 
allows for consideration of ways that rules are used to 
manage divergence of individual and organizational goals, a 
phenomenon that is an important element of organizational 
evolution.
Control Mechanisms in Wikipedia
Wikipedia’s hierarchy of roles creates a class of people who 
apply the control mechanisms for the group: the 
administrators. Though, it is sometimes claimed that this 
hierarchy does not exist. Administrators are the only ones 
who can, as the Wikipedia site suggests, “protect and delete 
pages, block other editors, and undo these actions as well.” 
Also, in its categories of policies, Wikipedia devotes an 
entire section to what it calls, “enforcement,” a term for 
controlling the behavior of others. Two in this section that 
require administrator participation are Deletion and 
Blocking. Since control mechanisms ensure consistency 
between the goals and actions of the individual and those of 
the community, and since the goals of individuals are 
sometimes destructive, such as vandalism, a policy like 
Blocking prevents chronic disrupters from damaging the 
group or its efforts. Blocking is the term for the prevention 
of editing rights for those participants who refuse to support 
the goals of the organization. An interesting feature of the 
Blocking policy ameliorates its punitive approach: it is not 
meant for “retaliation,” but instead for “encouraging” 
appropriate behavior. A control mechanism of this sort, 
therefore, guides normative behavior rather than punishes 
deviance.
The Three-Revert Rule (called a “rule” but considered a 
“policy” by Wikipedia) is a community-specific control 
mechanism. It states that an editor may not make more than 
three changes to an encyclopedia page within a twenty-four 
hour period. The stated purpose for this policy is to prevent 
what the group calls “edit wars,&quot; or conflicts between two 
or more editors over an entry that result in the constant 
effort to assert the validity of one version of it over another. 
Administrators established this rule because, as Wikipedia 
founder Jimbo Wales says, “revert warring has become an 
absurd drain on us.” This control mechanism, therefore, 
protects the administrators from overload created by editors 
who refuse to negotiate about the contents of an entry.
Implications for Control Mechanisms
Where coordination assumes that all participants in a 
community have the same motives and merely need to 
understand how to get something done in terms of sequence 
or procedure, control suggests to the community what not to 
do and establishes rules of prevention of behaviors that will 
disrupt the process of the organization. These mechanisms
1107
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
are exceptional, for they can largely be applied only by 
administrators, by those with power acceded to them by the 
group through their demonstrated degree of participation in 
editing and through the acknowledgement of those efforts 
by the other power holders and wielders in the system.
IMPLICATIONS FOR CREATION OF WIKI-BASED 
SYSTEMS AND DESIGN OF PLATFORMS
We suggest, therefore, that pursuing the “policyless” ideal 
that wikis represent is a pipedream. Policy creation and 
maintenance is an important aspect of the work that must be 
done to keep the community running
Providing tools and infrastructure mechanisms that support 
the development and management of policies is an 
important part of creating social computing systems that 
work. For example, work has been done on policy 
extraction that focuses on identifying rules which can be 
embedded in the infrastructure to support coordination and 
organization. This study suggests that policies vary in their 
intention to support coordination and organization, thus the 
application of the work on policy extraction is narrowed. 
For example, a rule acting as an external signal has less 
intention for coordination and organization. As a result, it 
may not be appropriate for it to be embedded in the 
infrastructure to support coordination and organization. 
Looking at the language used in writing the policy may 
signal its intention to support coordination and organization 
and, subsequently, whether it is a candidate for embedding 
in the infrastructure. More detailed systematic studies can 
provide insight into a policies candidacy for embedding in 
the infrastructure.
While there is something to be said about treating policies 
as coordination mechanisms that are automated or at least 
embedded directly in the technology, that approach is not 
without its pitfalls. Since policies can also be highly 
symbolic or meaning-filled, embedding them or automating 
them may not work because it could remove this function or 
make it less effective for this purpose. Furthermore, it may 
be possible that different rules playing different roles have 
varying importance for the success of the wiki at specific 
phases in the wiki lifecycle.
This work raises important questions for organizations 
implementing wikis and collaborative technologies for 
internal use. When organizations invest in these 
technologies, such as Lotus Notes and Microsoft 
Sharepoint, their first step is often to put in place a 
collection of policies and guidelines regarding their use. 
However, less attention is given to the policies and 
guidelines created by the groups that use these systems – 
which are often left to “emerge” spontaneously. The 
examples and concepts described in this paper highlight the 
complexity of rule formation and suggest that support 
should be provided to help collaborating groups create and 
maintain effective rulespaces.
Lastly, the Wikipedia archives suggest that facilitating, 
supporting, and managing this system of rules may not be
simply a matter of data collection. Rather, serving this 
system well is a matter of promoting situational awareness 
and strategic intervention in a complex, evolving system.
CONCLUSIONS
Wikis have captured the imagination of many because as a 
technology they support unencumbered, highly flexible, 
very visible, and accessible collaboration [5, 11, 22, 42, 52, 
53]. These features have led many commentators and 
authors to wax eloquently about the possibility of new types 
of work and organization which are peer-based, non-
hierarchical, non-bureaucratic, emergent, complex, and 
communal.
While it may be the case that wikis do in fact provide a 
basis for this type of work arrangement, the study reported 
here suggests that the true power of wikis lies in the fact 
that they are a platform that provides affordances which 
allow for a wide variety of rich, multifaceted organizational 
structures. Rather than assuming that rules, policies, and 
guidelines are operating in only one fashion, wikis allow 
for, and in fact facilitate, the creation of policies and 
procedures that serve a wide variety of functions – and as a 
result they are capable of truly supporting a much broader 
range of structures and activities than many of the other 
more structured, collaborative platforms.
This suggests that not only are wikis a platform that has 
greater potential in organizational and public use, but also 
that, from a design perspective, they provide a valuable 
opportunity for using the “sidewalk design strategy” of 
providing a field of grass and watching where and how the 
users walk, or so-called desire paths. This study provides a 
basis for describing these paths. Future studies in particular 
applications would do well to ask how these issues are 
addressed, capabilities are used, and how the activities and 
mechanisms that come into play can be helpfully reinforced 
or supported through the interface and infrastructure.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the members of the Online 
Community Research Group at Carnegie Mellon University 
and especially Bob Kraut and John Levine.
REFERENCES
1. Ahuja, M.K. and K.M. Carley, Network structure in 
virtual organizations. Organization Science, 1999. 
10(6): p. 741-757.
2. Barreto, M. and N. Ellemers, The impact of anonymity 
and group identification on progroup behavior in 
computer-mediated groups. Small Group Research, 
2002. 33(5): p. 590-610.
3. Baym, N., Interpreting soap operas and creating 
community: Inside a computer-mediate fan culture. 
Journal of Folklore Research, 1993. 30: p. 143-176.
4. Baym, N.K., Tune in, log on: Soaps, fandom, and 
online community. 2000, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications.
5. Bryant, S.L., A. Forte, and A. Bruckman, Becoming
wikipedia: Transformation of participation in a
1108
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
collaborative online encyclopedia, in GROUP. 2005: 
Sanibel Island, FL.
6. Burnett, G. and L. Bonnici, Beyond the faq: Explicit 
and implicit norms in usenet newsgroups. Library &amp; 
Information Science Research, 2003. 25(3): p. 333.
7. Chidambaram, L. and L.L. Tung, Is out of sight, out of 
mind? An empirical study of social loafing in 
technology-supported groups. Information Systems 
Research, 2005. 16(2): p. 149-168.
8. Cohen, N., Defending wikipedia&apos;s impolite side, in The 
New York TImes. 2007, The New York Times 
Company: New York, NY.
9. Connelly, T. and B.K. Thorn, Discretionary databases: 
Theory, data, and implications, in Organizations and 
communication technology, J. Fulk and C. Steinfield, 
Editors. 1990, Sage Publications: Newbury Park, CA. 
p. 219-233.
10. Fogel, K., Producing open source software: How to 
run a successful free software project 2005,
Sebastopol, CA O&apos;Reilly Media, Inc.
11. Forte, A. and A. Bruckman, Why do people write for 
wikipedia? Incentives to contribute to open-content 
publishing, in Group 2005 Workshop - Sustaining 
Community: The role and design of incentive 
mechanisms in online systems. 2005: Sanibel Island, 
FL.
12. Galegher, J., L. Sproull, and S. Kiesler, Legitimacy, 
authority, and community in electronic support groups. 
Written Communication, 1998. 15(4): p. 493-530.
13. Hinds, P.J. and D.E. Bailey, Out of sight, out of sync: 
Understanding conflict in distributed teams. 
Organization Science, 2003. 14(6): p. 515-632.
14. Hinds, P.J. and M. Mortensen, Understanding conflict 
in geographically distributed teams: The moderating 
effects of shared identity, shared context, and 
spontaneous communication. Organization Science, 
2005. 16(3): p. 290-307.
15. Jensen, C. and W. Scacchi. Collaboration, leadership, 
control, and conflict negotiation in the netbeans.Org 
software development community. in Proceedings of 
the 38th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences. 2005. Waikola Village, HI.
16. Jensen, C. and W. Scacchi. Role migration and 
advancement processes in ossd projects: A
comparative case study. in Proceedings of the 27th 
International Conference on Software Engineerring. 
2007. Minneapolis, MN.
17. Jones, Q., G. Ravid, and S. Rafaeli, Information 
overload and the message dynamics of online 
interaction spaces: A theoretical model and empirical 
exploration. Information Systems Research, 2004. 
15(2): p. 194-210.
18. Kennedy, H., Beyond anonymity, or future directions 
for internet identity research. New Media &amp; Society, 
2006. 8(6): p. 859-876.
19. Kim, A.J., Community building on the web: Secret 
strategies for successful online communities. 1 ed. 
2000, Berkeley, CA Peachpit Press.
20. Kirsch, L.J., Portfolios of control modes and is project 
management. Information Systems Research, 1997. 
8(3): p. 215-239.
21. Kirsch, L.J., et al., Controlling information systems 
development projects: The view from the client. 
Management Science, 2002. 48(4): p. 484-498.
22. Kittur, A., et al., Power of the few vs. Wisdom of the 
crowd: Wikipedia and the rise of the bourgeoisie, in 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI). 2007: San Jose, CA.
23. Kittur, A., et al., He says, she says: Conflict and 
coordination in wikipedia, in Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI). 2007: San Jose, 
CA.
24. Kollock, P. and M. Smith, Managing the virtual 
commons: Cooperation and conflict in computer 
communities, in Computer-mediated communication: 
Linguistic, social and cross-cultural perspectives, S. 
Herring, Editor. 1996, John Benjamins: Amsterdam. p. 
109-128.
25. Kuechler, W.L. and C. Vaishnavi, So, talk to me: The 
effect of explicit goals on the comprehension of 
business process narratives. MIS Quarterly, 2006. 
30(4): p. 961-A16.
26. Lakhani, K.R. and E. von Hippel, How open source 
software works: &quot;Free&quot; User-to-user assistance. 
Research Policy, 2003. 32(6): p. 923-943.
27. Malone, T., W. and K. Crowston, The interdisciplinary 
study of coordination. ACM Computing Surveys, 1994. 
26(1): p. 87-119.
28. Maney, K., Mass collaboration could change way 
companies operate, in USA Today. 2006.
29. March, J.G., M. Schulz, and X. Zhou, The dynamics of 
rules: Change in written organizational codes. 2000, 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
30. McKenna, K.Y.A. and J.A. Bargh, Coming out in the 
age of the internet: Identity &quot;Demarginalization&quot; 
Through virtual group participation. Journal of 
Personality &amp; Social Psychology. 75(3): p. 681.
31. Nidumolu, S.R. and M.R. Subramani, The matrix of 
control: Combining process and structure approaches 
to managing software development. Journal of 
Management Information Systems, 2003. 20(Issue 3): 
p. 159.
32. Ostrom, E., Collective action and the evolution of 
social norms. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2000. 
14(3): p. 137-158.
33. Petronio, S., The boundaries of privacy: Praxis of 
everyday life, in Balancing the secrets of private 
disclosures, S. Petronio, Editor. 2000, Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates: Mahwah, N. J. p. 37-50.
34. Petronio, S., et al., (mis)communicating across 
boundaries. Communication Research, 1998: p. 571- 
595.
1109
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
35. Raymond, E., The cathedral and the bazaar. 
Knowledge and Policy, 1999. 12(3).
36. Ren, Y., R.E. Kraut, and S. Kiesler, Applying common 
identity and bond theory to the design of online 
communities. In press, 2006.
37. Riva, G. and C. Galimberti, Computer-mediated 
communication: Identity and social interaction in an 
electronic environment. Genetic, Social &amp; General 
Psychology Monographs, 1998. 124(4): p. 434-463.
38. Roberts, J.A., I.-H. Hann, and S.A. Slaughter, 
Understanding the motivations, participation, and 
performance of open source software developers: A 
longitudinal study of the apache projects. Management 
Science, 2006. 52(7): p. 984-999.
39. Simon, H., Bounded rationality and organizational 
learning. Organization Science, 1991. 2(1): p. 125-134.
40. Slaughter, S.A. and L.J. Kirsch, The effectiveness of 
knowledge transfer portfolios on software process 
improvement: A field study. Information Systems 
Research, 2006. 17(3): p. 301-320.
41. Stewart, K.J. and S. Gosain, The impact of ideology on 
effectiveness in open source software development 
teams. MIS Quarterly, 2006. 30(2): p. 291-314.
42. Viegas, F., M. Wattenberg, and K. Dave, Studying 
cooperation and conflict between authors with history 
flow visualizations, in Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI). 2004: Vienna, Austria.
43. Viegas, F.B., et al. Talk before you type: Coordination 
in wikipedia. in Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. 2007. 
Big Island, HI.
44. von Krogh, G., S. Spaeth, and K.R. Lakhani, 
Community, joining, and specialization in open source 
software innovation: A case study. Research Policy, 
2003. 32(7): p. 1217-1241.
45. Wikipedia contributors, Ignore all rules. 2006, 
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
46. Wikipedia contributors, Wikipedia talk:Biographies of 
living persons 2007, Wikipedia, The Free
Encyclopedia.
47. Wikipedia contributors, Wikipedia talk: Copyrights 
2007, Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
48. Wikipedia contributors, Wikipedia: Policies and 
guidelines. 2007, Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
49. Wikipedia contributors, Wikipedia: Consensus. 2007, 
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
50. Wikipedia contributors, Wikipedia: Criteria for speedy 
deletion. 2007, Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
51. Wikipedia contributors, Wikipedia:Neutral point of 
view. 2007, Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
52. Zhang, X.M. and F. Zhu, Intrinsic motivation of open 
content contributors: The case of wikipedia, in 
Workshop on Information Systems and Economics. 
2006: Evanston, IL.
53. Zlatić, V., et al., Wikipedias: Collaborative web-based 
encyclopedias as complex networks. Physical Review, 
2006. 74(016115).
1110
