CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Topobo in the Wild
Longitudinal Evaluations of Educators Appropriating a Tangible Interface
Amanda Parkes, Hayes Raffle and Hiroshi Ishii
Tangible Media Group
MIT Media Lab
20 Ames St.
Cambridge, MA 02139
{amanda, hayes, ishii}@media.mit.edu
ABSTRACT
What issues arise when designing and deploying tangibles 
for learning in long term evaluation? This paper reports on a 
series of studies in which the Topobo system, a 3D tangible 
construction kit with the ability to record and playback 
motion, was provided to educators and designers to use over 
extended periods of time in the context of their day-to-day 
work. Tangibles for learning - like all educational materials 
- must be evaluated in relation both to the student and the 
teacher, but most studies of tangibles for learning focus on 
the student as user. Here, we focus on the conception of 
the educator, and their use of the tangible interface in the 
absence of an inventor or HCI researcher. The results of this 
study identify design and pedagogical issues that arise in 
response to distribution of a tangible for learning in different 
educational environments.
Author Keywords:
Tangible User Interface, Learning, Digital Manipulative, 
Education, Case Studies
ACM Classification Keywords:
K.3.1: Computers and Education: Computer Uses in 
Education H.5.2 User Interfaces: Evaluation/Methodology
INTRODUCTION
Tangibles for learning [7] have sought to build on the success 
of educational manipulatives and constructivist learning 
while engaging learners in new ideas about dynamic systems 
through the use of hands-on experimentation with embedded 
computer technologies. The design principles behind Tangible 
User Interfaces [5] include leveraging natural metaphors of 
object usage and taking advantage of people’s inherent skills 
and assumptions about the physical world. This research has 
yielded numerous projects which have sought to create tools 
and environments which make accessible to children many
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
Figure 1. Children play with Topobo at a festival in Denmark
of the complex and temporal processes that computers can 
model and demonstrate well.
Because of the physical nature of tangibles, large scale 
deployment (which could be much more easily accomplished 
in a software system) is challenging; it is difficult and 
expensive to produce and maintain the extensive hardware 
necessary. Research projects are generally evaluated in small 
scale user studies run by the researchers who created them, 
and who are looking to qualitatively examine a planned 
hypothesis and evaluate the children’s experiences and/or 
use of the interface. Such studies often employ observation 
and interview with the users, and follow an ethnographic 
model of qualitative evaluation. However, ethnographic 
methodology has shown that in real world situations, the issues 
and results that people confront with products or systems 
are often divergent of the designer’s assumptions, and often 
arise when the designer is removed from the scenario [15]. 
While there has been one prominent tangible programming 
system that was evaluated at length in an educational context 
with students [14], our research focuses design evaluation 
on teachers as users rather than on children as users. The 
precedent of this approach was established by Rode in the 
technique of Curriculum-Focused design [12]. The results of 
this study seek to further the understanding and implications 
of the appropriation of technology in educational settings by 
educators, as originally discussed by Salomon [13], among 
others.
1129
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
MOTIVATION AND RESEARCH GOALS
This paper reports on a series of studies in which the Topobo 
system [10] (fig. 2), a 3D constructive assembly with kinetic 
memory, was provided to educators and designers to use in 
the context of their day-to-day work, over extended periods 
of time. Over the past three years, tens of thousands of 
people in Europe, Asia and North America have experienced 
Topobo in settings ranging from classrooms, museums, 
festivals, workshops, community centers, and homes. While 
numerous, many of the interactions were very short in 
exposure and confirmed the initial findings of the original 
Topobo studies. As part of a deeper question concerning 
the potential educational impact of a tangible interface, we 
sought to turn sets of Topobo over to educators to address 
issues related to large-scale use of a tangible for learning:
•	In what contexts and environments can Topobo succeed?
•	Over what time period will children use Topobo, and how 
will their use and interpretations of the system evolve?
•	What age children will benefit from Topobo, and how will 
their experiences differ?
•	What uses will other educators invent with Topobo?
The Topobo system
Topobo is a 3D constructive assembly system with the ability 
to record and playback physical motion. Topobo uses a 
programming by demonstration model (fig. 3). By snapping 
together a combination of Passive (static) and Active 
(motorized) components, people can quickly assemble 
dynamic biomorphic forms like animals with Topobo, 
animate those forms by pushing, pulling, and twisting them, 
and observe the system repeatedly play back those motions. 
For instance, a child can build a dog and teach it how to walk 
by twisting the dog’s body. The dog will then walk on its 
own. Normally, in a structure with many Actives, all of the 
actives will synchronously record or playback their own local 
motions. However, if a special active called a Queen is used, 
all of the other actives will mimic the Queen’s motion.
The original evaluation of Topobo, conducted in classrooms 
with children ages 5-13 suggested that children develop 
syntonic relationships with Topobo creations and that their 
experimentation with Topobo allows them to learn about 
movement and animal locomotion through comparisons 
of their creations to their own bodies. Children explored 
physics concepts like dynamic balance, center of gravity,
Figure 2. a) The Topobo System: an Active surrounded by
Passives b) a Topobo ‘moose’ designed by 2 eighth grade girls in
the original Topobo evaluation
torque/leverage and system behavior in their experiments 
with the system [10].
METHODOLOGY
As part of a research initiative pursuing outreach for 
educational technologies [4], Topobo was reengineered 
and mass produced with the specific purpose of providing 
educators with a new means to explore motion construction 
and kinematics principles. This manufacturing effort was 
funded by a modest educational outreach grant and required 
two years of extensive collaboration with an Asian toy 
manufacturer. Sets of manufactured Topobo were then 
distributed to educators (teachers, museum developers, 
educational researchers, graduate students) in the United 
States and Europe. The sets included Actives, Passives, basic 
Queens, power supplies and cables, and simple booklets. The 
booklets described the project concept, design and technical 
details, instructions for programming, and three sample 
creations with basic assembly instructions. The educators 
were also directed to the Topobo website which contains 
additional videos, published papers and visual materials.
Extensive data has been collected over the past year and a 
half, mostly in the form of interviews with educators and 
educational researchers working with Topobo. We are 
seeking to examine the perspective of the educators, and their 
reactions and plans when presented with Topobo as a new 
educational toy or kinetic material. We report how Topobo 
was used by various educators and what kind of initiatives, 
programming, or curricula they developed in these different 
environments when the researcher was removed entirely 
from designing a study or guiding the technology. In this
Figure 3. Programming Topobo a) plug in Active b) press button to record c) turn the axis with a motion d) press button for playback
1130
