CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
8:01:48 PM B5 watching TV, B1 turns TV on
8:06:24 PM B5 joins B1 at Desperate Housewives 
8:07:00 PM B 1: “How are you?”
8:08:38 PM B5: “Good!”
8:09:05 PM B1: t, [thumbs-up] 
8:09:18 PM B5: t, [thumbs-up] 
8:10:20 PM B5: “I really like this!” 
8:17:26 PM B1: “Call me!”
Table 2: Sample interaction sequence from logs.
Live together,” while they talked on the phone. However, 
they haven’t done anything like that since their children 
were little. Until they participated in this study:
“I noticed the orb was blue, so I knew somebody had their 
television on, and sure enough, it was [B2’s household]. 
And I knew that her husband’s at work and her kids were at 
school, so I deduced it was [B2]. And so without even 
saying ‘Who’s there?’ I immediately went to her channel, 
which was Oprah, and I sent her a thumbs-up. And then 
she thumbs-upped me, and then two seconds later I said [to 
myself], ‘This is dumb!’ And then [I called her, and] we 
had a whole conversation.”
In this story, we can see that the ambient display serves to 
initially draw the participant into an interaction which then 
becomes progressively deeper, culminating in a direct voice 
conversation. This is a pattern we can see repeated with 
different variations in the logs (Table 2).
It should be pointed out that although turning the TV on in 
response to the orb was one of the most commonly reported 
behavior patterns in our study, some participants did not 
have a desire to turn on the television and dig deeper into 
the presence information. B3 said: “[The orb is] kind of 
interesting, but once again, what do I care if somebody is 
watching TV?”
Other participants were curious, but had little interest in 
talking about it. B2’s husband said he would “turn it on just 
to see what they’re watching, and then probably send them 
a message saying that ‘it sucks’ or something.” To put this 
in context, he rarely socializes around TV content anyway; 
although B1’s husband is his best friend, he has only once 
been over there to watch TV, for a Super Bowl party.
Meeting the Goal of Connectedness
Our participants reported that when they saw the ambient 
colors, they found themselves thinking about the fact that 
others were watching TV. In some cases this translated into 
a feeling that they could “know what’s going on,” (B2’s 
husband) with others in the study. Said A3: “I still think the 
orb is kinda the coolest part of the whole thing because it’s 
really neat to see it change color and then know that 
something is going on on the other end to cause it to do 
that.” The husband of A1 said: “Even before I turned on the 
TV, I knew that someone was on there.” B1 put it this way:
“I liked the different colors, I liked coming in the house and 
saying ‘oh, someone’s home watching TV too now.’ I don’t 
know, it was like a friendly feeling, like someone else is 
home and I’m not the only one home tonight.”
While B1 knew all the other participants in her trial, that 
was not true for the others. Participants on the periphery of 
the group could only imagine what it would be like to use 
the system with people closer to them. For example B5, 
who expressed dismay with the system overall, said “it’s a 
love connection. You have feelings for these people and 
you care more. My parents could be blue, my sisters could 
be pink, orange, green.” While B3 did not find the orb 
useful during the study, when she was asked if she would 
be more interested if the orb was telling her about different 
people, she answered:
“Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Probably. If it’s somebody I was 
closer to. [ ... ] It’s almost like a communication light 
bulb. You know what I mean? Like the fire bell goes off, 
and ‘Ding, ding, ding!’ If I saw that, I’d be ‘Hmm, Dad’s 
watching,’ or, I feel like ‘Hmm, I’m connecting with 
somebody.’ It sounds so stupid, but maybe you’re 
connecting with somebody.”
Inference and Learning about Presence
Despite the fact that our ambient displays only showed 
three colors, our participants were able to combine the 
information conveyed with previous social knowledge in 
order to draw rich inferences about the other people in the 
study. In some cases it inspired them to leaps of 
imagination, like when B2’s husband saw the orb turn blue 
when someone turned the TV on at 2 am: “I just figured 
somebody was watching, maybe fell asleep on the couch, 
maybe some guy got thrown out of the bedroom for the 
night.” At other times the speculations were more mundane, 
as when B 1 looked at the orb one morning: “The orb was 
yellow and no one was on, so I&apos;m assuming everyone was 
already at work.” This statement also exemplifies another 
use our participants found for the ambient information: 
Whether or not someone was watching TV was used as a 
proxy for whether they were home. Naturally, the presence 
information in the buddy list was a helpful supplement to 
the ambient devices for this purpose. A5 put it this way: 
“It’d be interesting when I’d be on at night, like ‘Oh, let me 
see if she’s on. Is she watching TV, is she home, is she 
out?’ So that was one way to know, ‘Yeah, she’s home, 
she’s watching TV.’ ”
We saw evidence that over the course of the study, our 
participants learned more about each other’s viewing habits, 
and used that knowledge to interpret the ambient signals 
with more confidence, guessing who might be on at any 
given time. Most of our participants knew little about the 
TV viewing habits of the rest of their group before the 
study commenced. To take just one example, A1 was only 
able to make general guesses about her friends’ viewing 
habits when the study started. At the end, on the other hand, 
she told us: “Yeah, I think as the two weeks progressed I 
kinda had a feel; like on Fridays I know [A4] works from
7
