CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Ambient Social TV:
Drawing People into a Shared Experience
Gunnar Harboe, Crysta J. Metcalf, Frank Bentley,
Joe Tullio, Noel Massey, Guy Romano
Motorola Labs
1295 E. Algonquin Rd., Schaumburg, IL 60196
{gunnar.harboe, crysta.metcalf, f.bentley, joe.tullio, noel.massey, guy} @motorola.com
ABSTRACT
We examine how ambient displays can augment social 
television. Social TV 2 is an interactive television solution 
that incorporates two ambient displays to convey to 
participants an aggregate view of their friends’ current TV- 
watching status. Social TV 2 also allows users to see which 
television shows friends and family are watching and send 
lightweight messages from within the TV-viewing 
experience. Through a two-week field study we found the 
ambient displays to be an integral part of the experience. 
We present the results of our field study with a discussion 
of the implications for future social systems in the home.
Author Keywords
Social television, interactive television, social presence 
awareness, ambient displays, field trial
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
Although Internet use is gaining importance, TV watching 
is still the primary recreational activity of American adults, 
accounting for half of all leisure time [7]. Although there is 
great social potential in TV watching as a shared activity 
and a topic for conversation [20], at least half of all people 
usually watch alone [10].
Many technologies coming out of the interactive television 
(iTV) field, such as Video-On-Demand and Personal Video 
Recorders (PVRs), focus on providing personalization and 
greater individual control. They cater to viewers as isolated 
individuals, and fragment audiences further [16].
However, in recent years ‘social television,’ the idea of 
using communication technology to connect TV viewers, in 
order to create remotely shared experiences around TV
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00 
content, has received much attention. Proponents of this 
idea see television as a social experience capable of 
reinforcing bonds in strong-tie relationships. TV 
programming can provide the common, shared experience 
that serves as a basis for socialization, even for groups who 
are already fairly close [29]. Social television systems 
typically integrate some combination of text chat, voice 
chat or video chat with TV programming, and use presence 
to provide awareness of the status and context of other users 
of the system [5, 9, 15, 23]. These efforts tie into earlier 
CMC work on telepresence and co-viewing, but come at the 
design and research questions from a different angle.
In previous work we noted that users of social television 
systems would benefit from features that indicate favorable 
times for shared viewing [15]. One solution is to use 
always-on ambient displays to let users be aware of when 
others are watching TV. From a research standpoint, we can 
then examine how this kind of awareness helps or 
encourages people to get in touch through their social 
televisions, and in particular, how it is used to initiate and 
escalate communication sessions. As no extended field 
trials of social television systems have been reported to 
date, these important issues remain largely unexplored.
In this paper, we present results from a two-week field 
study of Social TV 2, an experimental social television 
system that incorporates an ambient display component to 
provide awareness of remote viewers. Two groups of five 
households participated, with the members of each group 
comprising an existing social circle. In addition to standard 
social television functionality, Social TV 2 incorporates 
ambient displays in order to keep users aware of the 
participation of their friends and family. We found that the 
ambient displays proved to be a defining component of the 
system. The displays were effective indicators of good 
times to use Social TV 2, increased participants’ awareness 
of others’ TV-viewing schedules, and encouraged 
participation in the system. This participation often began 
as a glance at the ambient display – a quick check on the 
status of a participant’s social network, but would 
frequently escalate to deeper or more extended 
communication. In this way, participants began treating TV 
watching as a fundamentally social activity. Thus, the
1
