CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
home so, like, this past Friday the light was blue, and I was 
like ‘the only person who’s going to be watching TV right 
now is her.’ So I kinda got a feel. Late night would be [A5], 
daytime would be [A3] because of the kids.”
By allowing participants to leverage their existing 
knowledge of one another to learn more detail about their 
viewing habits, the ambient information conveyed by Social 
TV 2 became more powerful. Participants were soon able to 
use the orb to glean (with some degree of uncertainty) 
information that they had initially needed to look up in the 
buddy list. One indication of the meaning that our 
participants attributed to the ambient devices’ output is the 
power the displays had to puzzle them. When B1 sat down 
to watch TV on a rainy evening, she noted to her surprise 
that no one else was logged on: “The oddest thing, it’s a 
nice night to be in... and not one person is on Social TV 
tonight!”
Presence seemed to lead to an expectation that someone 
who was watching TV was available for interaction. 
Unfortunately, our participants were often disappointed. B2 
told us in a voice mail: “We’ve not really heard back from 
people, the orb is blue, I don’t know if they’re getting them 
or if they’re just not sending back or what the problem is.” 
In the phone interview she said that when people weren’t 
responding, perhaps “they just wanted to watch their show, 
and they were ignoring you.” B1 said that when she notices 
the orb turning blue or purple and turns on the TV, she felt 
like “they’re on for a few minutes, we say hello, and then 
someone turns it off or they have to go.”
DISCUSSION
An Integral Component of Social TV 2
If we consider the ambient devices in isolation, they appear 
as fairly ordinary displays for peripheral presence 
awareness. And indeed, the results show that they 
successfully functioned as such. This, along with the fact 
that the orb, at least, was on the whole so well liked, goes 
some way towards validating our design, but it is not by 
itself a particularly novel finding. Far more interesting are 
the ways in which the ambient devices and the other Social 
TV 2 features interacted. Our findings reveal and hint at a 
number of interesting behaviors emerging, and these are 
particularly relevant to the design and understanding of 
future social systems in the home.
Our system was designed so that the ambient devices only 
worked while the Social TV 2 client remained connected to 
the network. And as we have noted, people, in general, 
liked the ambient lights, both because of the information 
they provided and for the aesthetic appeal. Although the 
design of our study didn’t allow us to conclusively test this, 
it does seem to indicate that the ambient devices would 
therefore encourage people to stay logged on, and serve as a 
reminder, if they ever do leave, to return as soon as 
possible, thereby ensuring the presence conduit remains 
open.
The orb and the Chumby were effective at conveying when 
other people were watching TV, and this allowed our 
participants to be aware of others’ availability even when 
their own TV sets were turned off and they were engaged in 
other activities. In this way, it reduced the risk of an 
opportunity for interaction going by unnoticed.
Together, these effects expand the interface between the 
system and the environment. For one thing, the chances of 
making contact are greatly increased. Also, the social 
television experience is no longer something that only takes 
place during the time you are actually watching TV. The 
ambient devices keep users engaged with the system while 
they go about other activities, thereby creating an ‘out-of-
the-box’ social experience.
Multiple Levels of Engagement
Our findings indicate that while it extended the social 
experience beyond the TV, the awareness provided by the 
ambient displays also helped draw our participants into the 
television experience and encourage them to use the 
system. This result supports previous efforts to use 
peripheral social awareness to lower the barriers to 
communication [17, 11].
We can generalize the steps reported by our users (and 
corroborated by the logs): the participants become aware of 
their friends’ availability through the ambient devices, turn 
on their TV (thereby themselves showing up as available to 
the other participants), look at their buddy list, and either 
join what one of their friends were watching or suggest that 
their friend join them. Once they were viewing together, 
they would usually send messages or emoticons, and 
sometimes this would culminate with a phone call. From 
this idealized flow, we can define different stages of 
interaction (Table 3). This can be viewed as an extension of 
Eggen et al.’s three interaction states [13].
We can see that as we move down the levels, the user 
becomes progressively more engaged with the experience, 
going from peripheral presence awareness to immersive 
participation through a number of intermediate levels. Part 
of the reason for this is that at each stage, the user has 
access to more detailed information. This is similar to a 
“ramping interface” model of information design and 
interaction [25], and allows users to drill down to the level 
they are interested in. In particular, each step provides more 
specific presence and richer contextual awareness. The 
ambient device provides only aggregate presence, and only 
conveys that a TV is on. The buddy list shows presence per 
household, and what they are watching. By watching the 
same thing, common ground is established, and by 
communicating it is possible to identify the other person at 
an individual level. However, the most interesting thing to 
note may be that as users become more deeply engaged, 
they also become increasingly present to, and eventually 
connected to, their buddies.
8
