CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
awareness component that displayed images automatically 
captured from the environment [17]. In their scenario, they 
seek to provide background awareness and help negotiate 
conversation engagement.
De Ruyter et al. compared different degrees of peripheral 
awareness of remote friends (displayed as video) while 
watching a shared TV program [27]. The system in their 
study only supported awareness while in a shared viewing 
session. Markopoulos et al. provide an overview of other 
awareness systems [22].
Evaluation of Ambient Displays
While the ambient display literature contains a wealth of 
design examples, it contains few reports of field 
evaluations. CareNet [8], a combination ambient/interactive 
display for elder care, arrived at a number of useful findings 
for the design of effective ambient displays for the home. 
Rowan et al. showed how an ambient display can foster 
connectedness and promote communication between elders 
and their adult children [26]. In addition to these studies, 
other researchers have shown how ambient displays can 
maintain a sense of connectedness between friends and 
loved ones [12, 28]. The Whereabouts clock [6] shows how 
simple location and messaging capabilities can enhance 
connectedness and allow family members make inferences 
about each others’ activities using their existing knowledge 
of one another. In this work, we build on these findings to 
demonstrate how ambient displays can be designed into a 
larger social application to promote use of that system and 
fulfill its goals of strengthening social bonds.
METHODS
In the design of our field study, we were interested to see 
whether the ambient displays met our design goal of 
encouraging social television participation during those 
periods when a participant’s friends and family were also 
using the system, if it led to other forms of communication, 
and how it would ultimately affect the feelings of 
connectedness between our participants. Striving to 
understand these patterns of behavior is an essentially 
qualitative question, and our approach was largely 
exploratory. We ran two separate in-home trials. Five 
households were recruited for each trial, and each trial 
lasted 14 days.
Recruitment
Participants were recruited using an independent recruiting 
agency that was instructed to find social groups in which 
the various household members were mutual friends, and 
all had strong ties with one another. The actual relationships 
between the recruited households varied (Figure 4). In both 
trials there was a central ‘hub’ (A1, B1), a person who 
knew and recruited all the other participants, but there were 
also at least two households who were more peripheral, 
without strong ties to the rest of the group. In both trials the
Figure 4: Social ties between households in our field
trials. Dashed lines represent acquaintances.
central hub was a woman, and the four friends she recruited 
female. However, in each group some of the husbands 
knew each other, and in the second group two of the 
husbands were best friends.
Group A, our first group, consisted of four couples living in 
their own households, two with (very young) children. The 
fifth participant was recently engaged, but still living with 
her parents and brother. Ages of the main participants 
ranged from 26 to 33. A2 and A5 are sisters, and A3 is the 
cousin of A1’s husband. A5 was not friends with anyone 
else in the study except her sister, and A3 and A4 knew 
each other only tangentially from having attended the same 
parties.
In Group B, our second group, all five nuclear families 
were living in their own households, and all five households 
included teenage children. Ages of the main participants 
ranged from 46 to 53. B1 was very close friends with B2 
and B4, and knew B3 and B5 well. Again we had a pair of 
sisters: B4 and B5, but B2, B3, and B4 only see each other 
at the parties of mutual friends, and B5 did not remember 
ever meeting B2 and B3.
While there were some husbands in both groups who knew 
each other well, and some of the teenage children in Group 
B knew each other, their relationships, for the most part, 
mirrored those of our female main participants. Thus, we 
had a number of different kinds of relationships represented 
in the two social groups, but neither group was uniformly 
tight-knit.
Deployment
For each household, the Social TV 2 system was installed 
in the room participants reported as being the most common 
place for watching TV. As mentioned earlier, Groups A and 
B received slightly different versions of the software, as a 
result of an iterative design process on the basis of Group 
A’s feedback. Each household was given one orb and one 
Chumby. We asked participants to place the Chumby in any 
part of their home where they spent a significant amount of 
time or passed by frequently. Six participants put it in the
4
