CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
kitchen, two in a hallway, and one in a bedroom. The last 
Chumby malfunctioned and was not used. Participants were 
given a brief (20 minute) introduction to the system and its 
features, and a phone number for technical support that they 
could call at any time. We asked each participant to use the 
system the way they would if they were not in a study, and 
explained that they did not have to use every feature, or any 
feature, unless they wanted to. Other household members 
were also welcome to use the system, and generally did so.
Data Collection
We used multiple methods for data collection, including 
interviews, usage logs, and voice mail diaries.
There were three sets of semi-structured interviews for each 
household. The initial interview lasted about half an hour 
and was used to collect background information. In a phone 
interview after the first week, lasting between 15 and 30 
minutes, we gathered data about the participants’ use of and 
reactions to the prototype during the first week. And the 
final interview, lasting from an hour to an hour and half, 
was structured to collect more detailed information on a 
number of topics. Whenever possible, we asked other 
household members to participate in the interviews. We 
recorded a total of 22 hours of interview data, but much of 
the material falls outside the scope of this paper.
We logged all interactions with the system, in order to 
document actual usage and to allow us to examine 
interesting incidents in detail later. The logs, then, provide 
support for some of the events described in the interviews. 
Cameras or sensors in the home would have been useful to 
put the system use in context, but we felt this would be too 
intrusive and technically complex for this study.
Instead, voice mail diaries were used to collect information 
on behaviors we could neither log nor directly observe, and 
which we were afraid would be forgotten prior to the 
interviews. We devised questions about behaviors 
surrounding the ambient presence/awareness features, 
communications with other people in the study, and their 
reactions to, as well as use of, the various features. So that 
the questions would not influence our participants’ behavior 
in advance, the participants were given 14 sealed envelopes, 
one for each day of the study, each containing that day’s 
questions. Thus, participants had the questions in front of 
them as they provided their feedback. Participants left 3 
hours and 41 minutes of voice mail messages in total.
Analysis
From the log data we extracted some basic measures of 
system use (Table 1). Given the small scale and non- 
experimental design of the study, we did not attempt further 
statistical treatment of the quantitative data.
The bulk of the analysis was instead qualitative, using a 
variation of the affinity diagram method. We reviewed the 
interview and voice mail data, and extracted observations, 
statements (which we transcribed) and behavioral
Activity	A	B
TV watched, connected (hrs)	154.27	180.77
TV watched, disconnected (hrs)	21.81	0.34
Buddy list views	185	390
Joined show through buddy list	62	160
Emoticons sent	59	120
Canned messages sent	N/A	185
Table 1: Aggregate usage data by group.
descriptions relating to ambient presence and awareness. 
These items were printed out as sticky notes.
Then, working as a team, we put these items together into 
groups or categories, a process of “comparison, contrast, 
and integration” [19]. To efficiently organize the data we 
used an affinity-like post-it chart [4]. Here we followed 
Bernard: As the categories were identified we would “pull 
all the data (that is, exemplars) from those categories 
together and compare them, considering not only what 
[items belong] in each emerging category but also how the 
categories are linked together” [3]. The patterns that 
emerged from this analysis process form the basis of the 
results that follow.
RESULTS
Our analysis identified several themes around the effect and 
effectiveness of our ambient displays. We first discuss their 
basic ability to communicate presence information, and 
then go on to talk about how they functioned as part of the 
larger Social TV 2 system. Throughout, we use quotes from 
the interviews and voice mail diaries to illustrate each 
particular theme in our participants’ own words.
Effectiveness as Ambient Displays
In considering how the ambient information interacted with 
the other components of the Social TV 2 system, the orb 
and Chumby would only be relevant if they actually 
functioned as ambient displays. Fortunately, they did.
Noticing and interpreting the displays
Our participants saw and noticed the changing colors of the 
orb, and by and large understood what they signified. B3: “I 
notice when the color’s on, whether it’s purple or blue, I 
know that someone else is actually on the system.” In fact, 
several participants commented on the orb consistently 
drawing their attention. B 1 mentioned in the final interview 
that “every time I passed by, a thousand times a day, I 
would look to see what color it was.” Only one participant, 
B4, could not account for the meaning of the different 
colors. When asked if she knew what they signified, she 
answered: “[My daughter] does, I don’t.”
The pulsing signal that the ambient devices sent when a 
suggestion was received was less widely understood. Many
5
