CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 1: The Social TV 2 system in use. The ambient
orb is visible in the upper left, above the television.
addition of ambient displays helped to fulfill the design 
objectives of the system.
In the following sections, we describe the design of our 
Social TV 2 prototype, which we then put in the context of 
existing work in both the social television and ambient 
display literature. We outline unanswered questions that led 
us to initiate this work and describe the mixed-method 
approach to our field study. We then present our results, 
describing how the ambient devices functioned as 
traditional presence displays and as components of a more 
complex communication system. Lastly, we show how 
these findings bear on other social applications in the home, 
and outline our future goals for social television research 
and design.
SOCIAL TV 2
Social TV 2 follows Social TV, the system previously 
described in Harboe et al. [15]. It is a prototype system that 
allows remotely located friends and family to experience 
some of the benefits of sitting next to one another on the 
couch and watching a TV program together (Figure 1). To 
provide this experience, we supplement typical TV 
functions with two additional features: TV presence 
information, and the ability to send and receive lightweight 
messages. The features were selected to specifically 
investigate people’s behaviors at the boundaries of the 
social television experience, as they begin and end their 
interactions, rather than the details of how they acted while 
fully engaged in the communication experience.
The prototype is implemented as a PC application running 
on top of GBPVR1 media center software. The system uses 
on-screen displays to communicate which of the user’s 
friends or family (‘buddies’) are currently watching, what 
they are watching, and what they have watched in the past.
1 http://www.gbpvr.com/
The laptop running the Social TV 2 software is connected 
to a television, and all interaction with the system is 
performed with a standard remote control. For our field 
tests we chose to use a TiVo® remote that had several keys 
relabeled to correspond to the features of our system.
TV Presence
A key requirement for encouraging participation in social 
television is the ability to make users aware of when their 
friends and family are logged into the system and watching 
programs on TV. This information can be viewed from an 
on-screen buddy list (Figure 2). The deployed system has 
two presence states: ‘watching TV’ and ‘away’. The ‘away’ 
state is intended to inform buddies that a user is not 
currently watching TV. It is set automatically when the TV 
is turned off or when no interactions with the system are 
detected for some time after a program has ended. Users 
can also disconnect from the social component of the 
system if they wish to watch TV in privacy, and will then 
appear to others to be ‘away.’ However, in this state many 
of the features of the system are disabled, preserving a ‘see 
and be seen’ information reciprocity.
Users can change to the same program that their buddy is 
watching from the buddy list. Additionally, whenever the 
channel is changed, a list of buddies who are also watching 
that program is displayed as part of the transient channel 
information banner.
Ambient Devices
While Social TV 2’s on-screen display provides presence 
awareness on the television, we wanted another means to 
convey this information when the TV wasn’t on, or when 
users were in a different room and unable to see the TV. 
We chose to use two separate displays capable of 
communicating information unobtrusively, visible from 
anywhere in a room, and which would fit in as household 
objects. The system has two different display devices to 
meet these needs (Figure 3).
Figure 2: The Social TV 2 on-screen buddy list.
2
