CHI 2008 Proceedings · Online Social Networks	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
where an intermediate component, an aggregator, is used 
by clients, with the very same SONAR API, to consolidate 
the data from different providers. This way, one can choose 
multiple providers and assign an appropriate weight to each 
of them. It is expected that federating more data providers 
will make the resulting answers to queries more complete.
Clients of SONAR may vary from expertise miners, 
through network visualizers, to user interface widgets. 
SONAR answers questions such as “who does this person 
communicate with most?”, “what are all the artifacts co-
authored by these two individuals?”, “whom should I invite 
to a brainstorm on a certain topic?”
SONAR includes two types of data sources: personal 
(private) and public. Personal sources, such as email and 
instant messaging (IM), are only available to their owner 
and reflect the owner’s personal, or egocentric, social 
network (i.e., all nodes in the network are directly related to 
the owner). Public data sources, such as blogs and 
organizational charts, are available to all users and reflect 
their extended, or sociocentric, network. SONAR maintains 
the privacy model of its data sources: only those users who 
have access to a certain piece of data by the original 
provider will have access to the social information extracted 
from this data by SONAR.
As of now, we implemented the SONAR API for over ten 
sources, public and personal, within the IBM intranet. 
SONAR’s ultimate goal is to be widely used by social 
networking and Web 2.0 services on the internet and to 
define a standard, analogous to RSS [11]. SONAR is based 
on the REST design pattern [9] and uses standard data 
formats such as Atom [23] and JSON [13].
When used for creating a sociocentric view of a social 
network, SONAR is based solely on public sources. Any 
user may use this view to examine publicly visible 
connections within any group of people. When used for 
creating an egocentric view of a user’s network, SONAR 
also makes use of the user’s personal sources. Enriching the 
egocentric network, as reflected in personal sources, with 
information from public sources, opens up new 
opportunities for learning about one’s extended network 
(i.e., one’s connections and their connections with others). 
Consider, for example, Alice who seeks a social connection 
to Cindy. Cindy may not appear at all in Alice’s egocentric 
network based on personal sources. However, examining 
the extended network, Alice may discover that Bob – who 
appears on her egocentric network by her personal data – is 
related to Cindy according to public sources. Alice will then 
be able to discover a social path to Cindy through Bob, 
based on aggregation of her personal and public sources.
In order to verify the fundamental concepts on which 
SONAR relies, namely aggregation and the usage of public 
sources, we conducted three experiments. The first 
experiment examines different social networks derived 
from four of SONAR’s implemented public data sources. 
The second experiment involves a user study in which over
a hundred users evaluated different buddylists derived from 
24 different combinations of SONAR public as well as 
personal data sources. For the third experiment we 
interviewed 12 users about their usage of a SONAR UI and 
their thoughts on the different buddylists. The experiments 
examine the diversity of the public data sources, their value 
to the user, and whether they add value over personal data 
sources. Finally, we checked whether there exists an ideal 
weighting scheme of the sources, which may serve as the 
system’s default, and followed users as they were 
composing their own ideal weighting scheme.
We note that the experiments in this paper examine 
buddylists and social networks generally, while, in practice, 
different semantics may yield different social networks. For 
example, the network consisting of users’ friends may be 
different from the network of people with whom users 
communicate most frequently, which may be different from 
the network of individuals with whom users share similar 
interests.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next 
section surveys related work, followed by a more detailed 
description of SONAR and typical usage scenarios. We 
then describe our hypotheses, research method, and results. 
The final section discusses conclusions and future work.
RELATED WORK
The formal discipline that studies interpersonal connections 
is called social network analysis (SNA) [29]. A social 
network (SN) is a graph that represents social entities and 
relationships between them. SNs have often been studied 
through the use of social science tools such as surveys and 
interviews, which require a great deal of human labor. The 
evolution of the Web, which is often referred to as Web 2.0 
[24], has introduced new possibilities for SN research.
Gathering SN Data from Computer Applications
There are several popular SN services on the Web, which 
help to connect friends and business acquaintances1. These 
services define an explicit SN. Users directly specify who 
their friends are and often manually state the nature of the 
connection. The manual nature of these networks is perhaps 
their main disadvantage. Only part of the user’s actual SN 
will be registered in any such application, and since 
explicitly entering social data is tedious, even users who are 
registered are likely to have incomplete information about 
their network. These applications are useful for SONAR, 
providing very accurate, even if partial, social connections.
The wealth of information in computer databases and 
applications is a good source for automatically obtaining 
various kinds of SN data without burdening users with the 
manual management of their network. For example, 
Wellman views computer networks as SNs and surveys 
how computer networks reflect and affect traditional SNs
1 {myspace, facebook, linkedin, orkut, friendster}.com
1018
