CHI 2008 Proceedings · Online Social Networks	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Following this, participants were asked to respond to the 
following questions adapted from [23] using free text entry:
•	What is the first thing that comes to mind when 
you think about what you enjoy most when using 
Facebook?
•	What other words describe what you enjoy about
using Facebook?
•	Using single, easy-to-understand terms, what do
you use Facebook for?
•	What uses of Facebook are most important to you?
Results
Two raters clustered the descriptive items and phrases 
developed by Facebook users in response to the first 
question. The raters worked collaboratively to develop the 
clusters, and were instructed to ‘identify responses that are 
related’. The author then discussed the themes with the 
raters, and named them accordingly. The main themes 
identified are outlined in Table 1.
Theme (sample user generated items)	Number
	of
	mentions
‘Keeping in touch’	52
Contacting friends who are away from home Chatting to people I otherwise would have lost contact with	
Passive contact, social surveillance Virtual people-watching.	19
‘Re-acquiring lost contacts’	15
Reconnecting with people I’ve lost contact with	
Finding people you haven&apos;t seen for a while	
‘Communication’ Being poked	15
Private messages Writing on walls	
Photographs	11
Tagged in picture Posting pictures Sharing pictures	
Design related Ease of use	4
Perpetual contact	4
Seeing what people have put as their &apos;status&apos; The continuous updates	
Seeing what my friends have been up to today	
‘Making new contacts’ Talking to singles	5
Getting new friends	
Joining groups	
Table 1: Frequency of mentions (Question 1) 
In keeping with previous research [e.g. 16], the use of 
Facebook to ‘keep in touch’ received the largest number of 
mentions, with the use of the site to make new contacts 
receiving a small number of mentions.
STUDY 2: IDENTIFYING USES AND GRATIFICATIONS
Item generation
A sample of items from each use and gratification proposed 
by users was extracted from the exploratory list developed 
in Study 1. Participants’ responses to items 2–4 were 
examined, and any occurrences of other uses or 
gratifications not mentioned in response to the first item 
were added to the list. This led to a total of 46 items. Where 
possible, the item was taken word for word from participant 
responses to Study 1.
Participants
Participants were 241 Facebook users recruited using the 
same methods outlined in Study 1. In addition, e-mails were 
sent to selected mailing lists with a request for participation 
(e.g. AIR-L). Participants were 80 males (33.2%) and 161 
(66.8%) females (mean age = 25.97 years (SD = 9.30, range 
15-66 years old). The majority of the sample were full time 
students (n = 151, 62.7%), 6.6% (n = 16) were part-time 
students and worked part- or full-time (or had carer 
responsibilities), and 30.7% were in full-time work and not 
studying (n = 78). The study was open during the final 
week in July, and throughout August.
Measures
The same demographic and Facebook use measures 
described in Study 1 were used in Study 2. Participants also 
completed an item related to their use of Facebook privacy 
settings, specifically if they had changed the default 
settings, and if so, the degree to which they had made them 
more private or more open.
Participants were finally asked to rate, using a 7-point 
Likert scale, the 46 uses and gratifications derived from 
Study 1 using the metric, “How important are the following 
uses of Facebook to you personally?’ The scale was 
anchored at 1 (very unimportant) and 7 (very important).
Results
Participants had an average of 124 friends linked to their 
Facebook profile (Range 1-1000, Median = 85, SD = 
129.97). Around half of the participants had been registered 
on the site for less than six months (6.3% for less than one 
month, 9.6% for between one and two months and 29.2% 
for between two and six months). The remaining 
participants had been signed up for between six months and 
a year (21.7%), more than one year, but less than two 
(21.7%) or for more than two years (10.8%). The majority 
of participants visited the site either daily (38.8%) or more 
than once a day (27.5%). Almost a quarter visited Facebook 
several times a week (22.5%), with 6.7% visiting once a 
week on average, and 4.2% visiting less than once a week.
1029
