CHI 2008 Proceedings · Online Social Networks	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
who reported leaving it at the default setting (n = 56), and 
those who reported making it more private (n = 137). In the 
main, privacy settings in Facebook allow users to hide their 
profile from people who are neither listed as ‘friends’ or 
members of the user’s own network. However, if the 
motive for using Facebook is to meet new people, then such 
privacy settings would be somewhat counter productive. To 
test this proposition, a MANOVA was conducted with 
privacy settings as the independent variable, and the 
responses to items related to meeting new people set as the 
dependent variables. The results showed a significant link 
between privacy settings and the responses to the items (F 
(8, 454) = 2.11, p &lt; .05). Analysis of the between subjects 
effects found no difference in responses to the ‘joining 
groups’ or ‘joining events’ items and privacy settings (ps &gt; 
.3), but a significant effect of reported privacy settings on 
responses to the item ‘meeting new people’ (F (2, 229) = 
4.16, p &lt; .02), and a marginally significant effect on the 
item ‘using advanced search to look for specific types of 
people’ (F (2, 229) = 2.48, p = .08). The means for the 
‘meeting new people’ item across the three privacy groups 
are shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Scores on ‘meeting new people’ by privacy
settings
These results suggest that for users wishing to use 
Facebook to meet new people, the privacy settings may be 
set at too stringent a level. Further analyses confirmed no 
links between the social connection scales and privacy 
settings, suggesting that a primary motivation for making 
one’s profile less private is the desire to meet new people.
DISCUSSION
Social networking sites pose a number of challenges for 
HCI researchers and practitioners. First, the actual uses and 
gratifications of such sites are not well understood. The 
present paper presents the first study of a social networking 
site using a ‘uses and gratifications’ framework, and also 
provides an empirically developed measurement tool for 
future research.
Second, previous research that has been conducted has 
tended to focus on campus-based use of Facebook [e.g. 7,
13, 6, 11, 17], which may limit the generalizability of any 
findings. However, the results of the present research 
support many of the conclusions of earlier research 
conducted on student populations. For instance, the 
distinction previously drawn between ‘social searching’ and 
‘social browsing’ uses of Facebook [16] was similarly 
evident in the present research. Moreover, in keeping with 
prior student-users research [e.g. 7, 16], the use of 
Facebook to ‘keep in touch’ was the most commonly 
mentioned term in Study 1, and formed a large proportion 
of the items comprising the first factor in Study 2.
However, the adoption of a uses and gratifications approach 
enables us to begin to probe in more depth the exact nature 
of ‘keeping in touch’ as both a use and a gratification. The 
results of the present study suggest that ‘keeping in touch’ 
comprises two main functions. The first is a surveillance 
function as identified by Lampe and colleagues [16]. 
Facebook is used to see what old contacts and friends are 
‘up to’, how they look and how they behave. In keeping 
with this use, there is evidence that Facebook profiles serve 
an important self-presentation tool [26]. Associated with 
this use is the social capital building gratification, where 
Facebook is used to build, invest in and maintain ties with 
distant friends and contacts [7, 11].
The ‘social search’ and ‘social browsing’ uses of Facebook 
identified by Lampe and colleagues [16] were closely 
related in the present study. The use of Facebook to search 
for new people loaded on the same factor as the use of 
Facebook to research offline contacts. This ‘virtual people 
watching’ was represented in both Factors 5 and 6, with the 
important distinction that Factor 6 relied primarily on 
‘friend of friend’ connections, while Factor 5 represented 
targeted investigation of people met offline, or searched for. 
Symptomatic of this distinction is the difference between 
‘looking up’ (Factor 5) and ‘looking at’ (Factor 6) people. 
In the present study, only social investigation was 
associated with a higher number of ‘friends’, not social 
network browsing.
Interestingly, an increased score on the content gratification 
scale was negatively related to the number of ‘friends’ 
reported to be linked to one’s profile. This perhaps suggests 
a sub-set of users gain gratification through the use of 
applications within Facebook, rather than through the 
accrual of ‘friends’. However, many of the applications 
available in Facebook are social in nature (e.g. scrabble 
games, ways to rate friends). But, at present these 
applications tend to rely on existing contacts, rather than the 
accrual of new ‘friends’. As such, they may serve to 
strengthen social ties, rather than acting to increase the 
overall size of a social network. Thus, investment of time 
and effort in social applications within Facebook may be 
akin to messaging between friends [11] – it solidifies ties, 
rather than creating new links.
Users responses on the scales created from the factors also 
predicted their pattern of use of the site. In keeping with
4 
3.5 
3 
2.5 
2 
1.5 
1 
0.5
0
Less private	Default	More private
1034
