CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
of background questions to assess their familiarity with 
computers and security tools. Before any tasks were pre-
sented to them, participants were instructed to think aloud 
about what information they would be using in making their 
decisions. All participants used the same Dell laptop with a 
15” monitor running Windows XP Home edition. An exter-
nal keyboard was used by the experimenters to bring up the 
alerts for each security task. The participants were asked to 
make security decisions as if the laptop being used was their 
own.
As discussed above, for the first security task participants 
were asked to download a video from the Microsoft website 
which caused an alert dialog box from the firewall to pop-up. 
After completing the first task, participants were instructed to 
browse to any website of their choosing. They were then 
presented with the next three tasks while they browsed 
online. Upon the completion of each task, the participant 
continued browsing until the next one was presented to them. 
We were careful during these tasks not to cause a popup to 
appear immediately after the user took an action (e.g., 
clicking a link) so that they would not erroneously think they 
caused the popup in those cases where they did not. For the 
final two tasks, none of the participants were familiar with 
the term ‘phishing site’ so a brief explanation was given.
Since we were assessing the intelligibility of the Sesame 
visualization, we declined to answer participant questions 
about the meanings of Sesame’s visual elements. We asked 
them to infer as best they could with the information given.
Participants were asked to think aloud during their decision 
making process for the six tasks, in order to aid us in under-
standing their reasoning processes. Upon completion of all 
tasks participants were asked follow-up questions in a semi- 
structured interview regarding the choices they made. We 
asked about the clarity of the decisions they had to make, the 
choices presented to them and the information provided by 
the security tool they used (i.e., Sesame or ZoneAlarm). We 
also asked for suggestions for improving the security tools. 
Each subject participated in the study individually and was 
voice recorded to capture responses to the interview ques-
tions and the think aloud.
RESULTS
For each participant, we gathered the following data: 1) 
background information, 2) the participant’s ‘miss-rate’ for 
the six tasks, and 3) responses to follow-up questions regard-
ing comprehension of the system information provided. We 
define miss-rate to be the number of potential threats the 
participant evaluated erroneously (i.e., judging a threatening 
situation to be safe or vice versa).
Participant security background: Based on the background 
information gathered, both the control and experimental 
groups were similar in terms of experience with computers 
and security tools. Participants in the control group had an 
average of 10.4 years of experience using the computer and 
only 2 out of 10 participants did not use any security tool 
(e.g. Norton Anti-virus, firewalls or anti-spyware). Similarly,
participants in the experimental group had an average of 9.2 
years of experience using the computer and 2 out of 10 did 
not use any security tools. Subjects in both groups were 
asked to briefly describe their security practices besides 
using security software.
Based on the responses in both groups, the majority of the 
participants did not have or could not recall additional 
security practices they performed besides making occasional 
updates to their security software when alerted to do so by 
their tools. Further, it seems that the amount of time spent 
using a computer does not necessarily translate into familiar-
ity with the system knowledge needed to make security 
decisions. Although participants’ computer usage averaged 
9-10 years, all were unfamiliar with basic system-level 
concepts, e.g., processes, network connections.
Security task miss-rate: Since our data were non-parametric, 
discrete, and did not appear to fit a known distribution, we 
used a two-tailed Mann-Whitney test to determine if the 
difference in the miss-rate between the ZoneAlarm (control) 
and Sesame (experimental) groups was statistically signifi-
cant. In the table below, we summarize the miss rate for both 
groups of participants:
	ZoneAlarm group miss- rate (6 males, 4 females)	Sesame group miss-rate (5 males, 5 females)
Females	45.8%	25% (with outlier* 30%)
Males	36%	20%
Miss-rate	40%	22.2% (with outlier* 26.6%)
*Outlier miss-rate: 66.7%
Table 1. Participant miss-rate for security tasks
Of the 20 participants, we identified one outlier whose miss- 
rate was 66.7%. During the study, this participant expressed 
concern about completing the tasks because s/he was very 
unfamiliar with the Windows environment given that the 
participant’s primary computer was a Macintosh.
Cumulatively over all of the tasks, the experimental group 
performed significantly better than the control group. Includ-
ing the outlier, the miss-rate for the group using Sesame is 
26.6% while the miss-rate is 40% for the control group 
(Z=1.97, P=0.05). (When the outlier is excluded, the Sesame 
group miss-rate is reduced further to 22.2%, Z=2.53, 
P=0.05). Over just the firewall-like tasks (T1-T4), the 
experimental group using Sesame performed 41 % better than 
the control group; but if the outlier is included, the experi-
mental group performs just 20% better. However, when tasks 
were considered individually or in smaller sets, we did not 
have statistically significant differences between groups due 
to our relatively small sample size. Figure 6 shows the 
success rates by task, including the outlier.
Information Comprehension: After the completion of the six 
security tasks, we interviewed participants to understand 
their reactions to the tasks they performed and, for the 
experimental group, to assess how much of Sesame they 
understood. Most of the participants in the control group 
stated that they were uncertain how to use the information
1052
