CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 6: Threats that reappeared after being
marked as “Fixed” by the participants.
represents a periodic turn of attention toward patching, 
rather than a desire by participants to “wrap up” patching 
before the end of the study. Much of this activity, for 
example, came from the condition two participants, who 
still had another week to participate in the study.
In the subsequent scan cycles, TALC logged any of these 
fixed threats that still match the vulnerability description 
from NVD and logs them as a reappearance of a threat, 
shown in Figure 6.
We should note here that, in our current implementation, 
threats for which the NVD has only an advisory (meaning: 
for which no patch is available) are never detected as fixed 
by TALC. To handle such a scenario, TALC allows the 
user to optionally ignore these threats that have reappeared. 
Threats that have been ignored will not reappear in the 
subsequent scans unless the user explicitly asks TALC to 
include them in the scan. Occurrences of this event are 
plotted in Figure 7. The spike near the start of the test may 
be due to the large number of vulnerabilities detected by 
TALC (see below for details on the number of raw 
vulnerabilities found on users’ systems). These Ignore 
events were also recorded when participants found the 
information provided by the patch website too daunting for 
them, and chose to leave the vulnerability unpatched. We 
discuss some suggestions for how to overcome both these 
shortcomings in the Future Work section.
DISCUSSION
There are multiple useful metrics for determining what 
constitutes efficacy in a tool such as TALC. One such 
metric is whether the tool increases the perceived safety of 
users; the second is whether it increases their actual safety. 
While we evaluated for both metrics, we believe that the 
latter is actually the more important, since perceptions of 
increased safety are of little value without actually 
increased safety.
In the sections below we first report on TALC’s efficacy in 
actually repairing system vulnerabilities, and then on users’ 
perceptions of its efficacy.
Figure 7: Participants asking TALC to Ignore a
threat from subsequent scans
TALC Effectiveness
We were pleased to find that TALC provided a dramatic 
increase in the safety of users’ systems during its 
deployment, and that TALC’s notifications made a large 
and statistically significant difference in users’ awareness 
and motivation to install patches.
In the weeks where TALC was dormant—meaning it was 
not drawing graffiti on the users’ desktops—none of the 
users patched any vulnerabilities whatsoever. However, in 
the week when the graffiti was placed on the desktop, 
seventy percent of the users fixed at least one vulnerability, 
with an average of 24.3 vulnerabilities patched per user 
(averaged over all users), and an average of 34.7 
vulnerabilities patched over users who patched at least one 
vulnerability. The number of vulnerabilities patched during 
the active period was found to be statistically significant 
(t(9) = 2.78, p = 0.0216) when compared to the dormant 
state when no vulnerabilities were patched.
The absolute number of vulnerabilities patched may seem 
artificially high, because it does not necessarily indicate the 
number of fixes downloaded, but rather the number of 
vulnerabilities patched: A single fix downloaded by the 
user may or may not patch multiple vulnerabilities.
At the beginning of the test, TALC found an average of 
47.6 vulnerabilities on our participants’ machines. All 
participants’ computers had at least five vulnerabilities, 
with the most having 64 vulnerabilities. These numbers not 
only confirm the threat posed by unpatched software, but 
also users’ lack of awareness about vulnerabilities on their 
systems for which patches exist.
Although TALC was effective in getting users to fix some 
of the vulnerabilities in their systems, none of the users 
patched their machines completely. Of the 482 
vulnerabilities left unpatched, 208 (43.15%) were 
considered serious threats by the NVD, 88 (18.25%) were 
considered moderate threats by the NVD, and 186 
(38.59%) were considered mild threats. The total number of 
vulnerabilities increased over the test period in part due to
Reappearances
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
1	2	3	4	5	6	7
Days Grafitti was shown
Control (Ignore)
70
1	2	3	4	5	6	7
40
20
60
50
30
10
0
Days Graffiti was shown
1062
