CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 1: TALC showing graffiti on the user&apos;s desktop along with a popup description of the threat.
with the patch management system as a secondary task, but 
with sufficient persuasion that users do not ignore it 
completely.
There have also been a number of research efforts intended 
to address the problem of excessive dependence on user 
interaction for security. For example, systems such as the 
Chameleon System for Desktop Security [23] attempt to 
categorize software into activity roles in an effort to reduce 
impinging on the user’s attention. However, most such 
tools are incomplete, or focus on a narrow range of threats. 
For example, Chameleon is a low-fi, paper-based prototype 
intended to address only the threat of malware.
TALC is designed in response to the need for better patch 
management on end-user systems. It aims to strike a 
balance between proactive and interactive support, in order 
to provide users with awareness and control over security 
risks without excessive attention costs or disruption to their 
workflow. TALC uses “calm” notifications, rather than 
intrusive techniques such as popups, to motivate specific 
user behaviors, and to provide awareness of overall system 
risk from software vulnerabilities. TALC also provides a
holistic approach to patch management, by assisting with 
patch management across the heterogeneous variety of 
applications and software components that may be installed 
on a user’s machine.
DESCRIPTION
In this section, we describe how the user sees TALC, as 
well as how TALC detects and assists in repairing software 
vulnerabilities.
TALC paints graffiti on the user’s desktop to indicate the 
presence of unpatched software on the user’s system (see 
Figure 1). Unlike intrusive techniques such as popups, this 
is meant to be a “low-distraction” technique, designed to 
make users aware of potential problems, while allowing 
them to act on them in their own time. In contrast to 
warning dialogs that interrupt users’ activities (“Your 
patches are out of date!”), this awareness function is 
intended to serve as a constant but gentle reminder, 
allowing users to finish their primary tasks without letting 
them forget about the security maintenance tasks that need 
their attention.
1057
