CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Condition Name	Size	Clicked	Phished
Firefox	20	20(100%)	0(0%)
Active IE	20	19(95%)	9(45%)
Passive IE	10	10(100%)	9(90%)
Control	10	9(90%)	9(90%)
Table 1. An overview depicting the number of participants in each 
condition, the number who clicked at least one phishing URL, and 
the number who entered personal information on at least one phishing 
website. For instance, nine of the control group participants clicked at 
least one phishing URL. Of these, all nine participants entered personal 
information on at least one of the phishing websites.
the messages, participants received a set of instructions for 
the second purchase. After participants checked their email 
after the second purchase (thereby encountering the second 
phishing message), an exit survey was administered. This 
online exit survey contained questions about participants’ re-
actions to the warning messages. The experimenter observed 
participants fill this out and asked followup questions if any 
of the responses were too terse or did not seem to follow 
the behaviors exhibited during the experiment. Those in the 
control group were not asked to complete an exit survey as 
they had not seen any warnings. Participants took an aver-
age of forty minutes to complete all the tasks and were given 
$35 in cash before leaving.
We were initially concerned that since participants did not 
explicitly want the items, the results might be skewed in fa-
vor of participants acting more cautious. However, we be-
lieve their desire to complete the study negated this. Thus, 
the desire to buy the items to complete the study was likely 
just as strong as if the participant were at home purchasing 
a desired item. Additionally, we do not believe that the cost 
of the items played any role since an attacker could use the 
stolen account credentials to make any number of larger pur-
chases.
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Overall we found that participants were highly susceptible 
to our spear phishing attack. However, users of the active 
phishing warnings were largely protected, since 79% chose 
to heed them. We found a significant difference between
the active IE and Firefox warnings (p &lt; 0.0004 for Fisher’s
exact test) as well as no significant difference between the 
passive IE warning and the control group (i.e. significantly 
more users were helped by the active Firefox warning than 
the active IE warning, while the passive IE warning is no dif-
ferent than not displaying any warning). We also found sig-
nificant differences between the active IE warning and the
control group (p &lt; 0.01) demonstrating that the active IE
warning is still significantly better than not displaying any 
warning. Table 1 depicts these results. In this section we ex-
amine how participants reacted to the initial phishing mes-
sages, and then we use the C-HIP model to analyze why 
certain warnings performed better than others.
Phishing Susceptibility
Our simulated spear phishing attack was highly effective: 
of the 106 phishing messages that reached participants’ in- 
boxes, participants clicked the URLs of 94 of them (89%).
While all participants made purchases from both Amazon 
and eBay, not every participant received both of our phish-
ing messages due to email filtering. Only two participants 
(3%) did not attempt to visit any of the phishing URLs. Of 
the 46 participants who received both phishing messages, 43 
clicked the Amazon link and 37 clicked the eBay link. How-
ever this difference was not statistically significant, nor were 
there any significant correlations based on which phishing 
message was viewed first. It should also be noted that every 
participant in the control group who followed a link from an 
email message also submitted information to the phishing 
websites (Table 1). Thus, in the absence of security indica-
tors, it is likely that this type of phishing attack could have a 
success rate of at least 89%.
With regard to the technical questions mentioned in the Re-
cruitment section, we noticed a negative trend between tech-
nical experience and obeying the warnings among Internet 
Explorer users (i.e. users with more technical experience 
were more likely to ignore the warnings). With Firefox, 
technical experience played no role: all users obeyed the 
warnings regardless of their technical experience.
We did not actually collect any information entered into the 
phishing websites. Instead the experimenter observed each 
participant and noted when they submitted information. Thus 
we cannot conclusively say whether all participants entered 
their correct information. However, the experimenter did 
note that all usernames were entered correctly, and no partic-
ipants denied entering their correct information when asked 
in the exit survey.
We found that participants had very inaccurate mental mod-
els of phishing. Both of our phishing messages contained 
language that said the orders would be cancelled if they did 
not visit the URLs. Thirty-two percent of the participants 
who heeded the warnings and left the phishing websites be-
lieved that their orders would be cancelled as a result—they 
believed that the emails were really sent from eBay and Ama-
zon. We asked 25 of the participants how they believed 
the fraudulent URLs came to them, and only three recog-
nized that the emails had been sent by someone not affiliated 
with either eBay or Amazon (we added this question halfway 
through the study). Thus, there seems to be some cognitive 
dissonance between recognizing a fraudulent website and 
the fraudulent email that spread it. This raises grave con-
cerns about Internet users’ susceptibility to phishing. Highly 
targeted phishing attacks will continue to be very effective as 
long as users do not understand how easy it is to forge email. 
At the same time, effective browser warnings may mitigate 
the need for user education, as we will now show.
Attention Switch and Maintenance
The first stage in the C-HIP model is “attention switch.” If 
a warning is unable to capture the user’s attention, the warn-
ing will not be noticed and thus be rendered useless. Unlike 
the passive indicators examined by Wu et al. [23], the ac-
tive warnings in Firefox and Internet Explorer get the user’s 
attention by interrupting their task—the user is forced to 
choose one of the options presented by the warning.
1070
