CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
URL did not match the usual eBay URL and so it could be 
fraudulent;” “I did look at the URL that I opened from the 
email, and the sender of the email, to confirm that they did 
look suspicious;” and “it made me look at the web address 
which was wrong.” One participant in the passive IE con-
dition and three in the active IE condition incorrectly used 
this information to fall for the phishing attacks. Some of 
the comments included: “The address in the browser was 
of amazonaccounts.com which is a genuine address” and “I 
looked at the URL and it looked okay.”
Finally, at least four participants claimed that the timing of 
the phishing emails with the purchases contributed to them 
ignoring the warnings. It is unclear how susceptible these 
participants would have been to a broader phishing attack, 
rather than the targeted attack that we examined.
DISCUSSION
In this section we provide some recommendations for im-
proving the design of phishing indicators based on the results 
of our study.
Interrupting the primary task — Phishing indicators need 
to be designed to interrupt the user’s task. We found that the 
passive indicator, which did not interrupt the user’s task, was 
not significantly different than not providing any warning. 
The active warnings were effective because they facilitated 
attention switch and maintenance.
Providing clear choices — Phishing indicators need to pro-
vide the user with clear options on how to proceed, rather 
than simply displaying a block of text. The users that no-
ticed the passive Internet Explorer warning, read it but ig-
nored it because they did not understand what they were sup-
posed to do. They understood it had something to do with 
security, but they did not know how to proceed. In contrast, 
the active warnings presented choices and recommendations 
which were largely heeded. Wu found similar results with 
regard to providing users with clear choices [22].
Failing safely — Phishing indicators must be designed such 
that one can only proceed to the phishing website after read-
ing the warning message. Users of the active Internet Ex-
plorer warning who did not read the warning or choices could 
only close the window to get rid of the message. This pre-
vented them from accessing the page without reviewing the 
warning’s recommendations. However, users of the passive 
Internet Explorer warning had the option of clicking the fa-
miliar ‘X’ in the corner to dismiss it without reading it, and 
accessing the page anyway.
Preventing habituation — Phishing indicators need to be 
distinguishable from less serious warnings and used only 
when there is a clear danger. Users ignored the passive in-
dicators because they looked like many other warnings that 
users have ignored without consequences, thus they appear 
to be “crying wolf.” Even the active Internet Explorer warn-
ing was not read in a few cases because users mistook it for 
other IE warnings. More people read the Firefox warnings 
because they are designed unlike any other warnings. Dy-
namic warning messages may help prevent habituation [3].
Altering the phishing website — Phishing indicators need to 
distort the look and feel of the website such that the user does 
not place trust in it. This can be accomplished by altering its 
look or simply not displaying it at all. The overall look and 
feel of a website is usually the primary factor when users 
make trust decisions [10]. When the website was displayed 
alongside the passive indicators, users ignored the warnings 
because they said that they trusted the look of the website.
CONCLUSION
This study has given us insights into creating effective se-
curity indicators within the context of phishing. Such in-
dicators are clearly needed as 97% of participants believed 
the phishing emails enough to visit the URLs. Of the par-
ticipants who saw the active warnings, 79% chose to heed 
them and close the phishing websites, whereas only 13% of 
those who saw the passive warnings obeyed them. Without 
the active warning indicators, it is likely that most partici-
pants would have entered personal information. However, 
the active indicators did not perform equally: the indica-
tors used by Firefox performed significantly better than the 
active warnings used by IE, though both performed signif-
icantly better than the passive IE warnings (which was not 
significantly different from not showing any warnings in the 
control group).
As phishing attacks continue to evolve, it is likely that highly 
targeted attacks will become more prevalent. Future indica-
tors within the phishing context need to be designed such 
that they interrupt the user’s primary task, clearly convey the 
recommended actions to take, fail in a secure manner if the 
user does not understand or ignores them, draw trust away 
from the suspected phishing website, and prevent the user 
from becoming habituated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to the members of the Supporting Trust Decisions 
project for their feedback, and Matthew Williams for his as-
sistance. This work was supported in part by the National 
Science Foundation under grant CCF-0524189. The views 
and conclusions contained in this document are those of the 
authors and should not be interpreted as representing the of-
ficial policies, either expressed or implied, of the National 
Science Foundation or the U.S. government.
REFERENCES
1. AMER, T. S., AND MARIS, J. B. Signal words and 
signal icons in application control and information 
technology exception messages – hazard matching and 
habituation effects. Tech. Rep. Working Paper 
Series–06-05, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, 
AZ, October 2006.
2. BANK OF AMERICA. How Bank of America SiteKey 
Works for Online Banking Security. 
http://www.bankofamerica.com/privacy/sitekey/, 2007.
3. BRUSTOLONI, J. C., AND VILLAMAR´IN-SALOM´ON, 
R. Improving security decisions with polymorphic and 
audited dialogs. In SOUPS ’07: Proceedings of the 3rd 
symposium on Usable privacy and security (New York, 
NY, USA, 2007), ACM Press, pp. 76–85.
1073
