CHI 2008 Proceedings · Am I Safe	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
You’ve Been Warned: An Empirical Study of the
Effectiveness of Web Browser Phishing Warnings
Serge Egelman
Carnegie Mellon University
egelman@cs.cmu.edu
Lorrie Faith Cranor
Carnegie Mellon University
lorrie@cs.cmu.edu
Jason Hong
Carnegie Mellon University
jasonh@cs.cmu.edu
ABSTRACT
Many popular web browsers now include active phishing 
warnings since research has shown that passive warnings 
are often ignored. In this laboratory study we examine the 
effectiveness of these warnings and examine if, how, and 
why they fail users. We simulated a spear phishing attack 
to expose users to browser warnings. We found that 97% 
of our sixty participants fell for at least one of the phishing 
messages that we sent them. However, we also found that 
when presented with the active warnings, 79% of partici-
pants heeded them, which was not the case for the passive 
warning that we tested—where only one participant heeded 
the warnings. Using a model from the warning sciences we 
analyzed how users perceive warning messages and offer 
suggestions for creating more effective phishing warnings.
Author Keywords
Phishing, warning messages, mental models, usable privacy 
and security
ACM Classification Keywords
H.1.2 User/Machine Systems, H.5.2 User Interfaces, D.4.6 
Security and Protection
INTRODUCTION
Online security indicators have historically failed users be-
cause users do not understand or believe them. The preva-
lence of phishing, a scam to collect personal information 
by mimicking trusted websites, has prompted the design of 
many new online security indicators. Because phishing is a 
semantic attack that relies on confusing people, it is difficult 
to automatically detect these attacks with complete accuracy. 
Thus, anti-phishing tools use warnings to alert users to po-
tential phishing sites, rather than outright blocking them.
The question remains, do anti-phishing warnings actually 
help users? Up until recently these tools have relied on pas-
sive indicators to alert users. A passive indicator indicates 
a potential danger by changing colors, providing textual in-
formation, or by other means without interrupting the user’s
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5 - 10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
Figure 1. The active Internet Explorer 7.0 phishing warning.
Figure 2. The passive Internet Explorer 7.0 phishing warning.
task. However, research has shown that passive indicators 
are failing users because users often fail to notice them or do 
not trust them [23].
The newest web browsers now include active warnings, which 
force users to notice the warnings by interrupting them. Mi-
crosoft’s Internet Explorer 7 includes both active and passive 
phishing warnings (Figures 1 and 2, respectively). When IE7 
encounters a confirmed phishing website, the browser will 
display an active warning message giving the user the op-
tion of closing the window (recommended) or displaying the 
website (not recommended). This warning is a full screen 
error, which turns the URL bar red if the user chooses to dis-
play the website (Figure 1). The passive indicator, a popup
1065
