CHI 2008 Proceedings · Search	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
items were available within the perceptual span (higher 
density), longer item visits were used, and when fewer 
items were available (lower density), shorter item visits 
were used. Longer visits were only used when they were 
efficient, i.e. when expected information gain was high.
2. Longer visits to items were combined with skipping. 
Participants in the high density conditions skipped items 
more often, visited fewer items, and spent less time 
searching overall.	In other words, when the potential
information gain for longer visits was high, people made 
more use of longer visits and reduced the number of items 
that they directly fixated. They made more use of the 
perceptual span when it was rational given the constraints 
of the visual system to do so, and gained an overall 
reduction in the required search time.
3. Participants were observed to reduce the number of items 
that they visited, i.e. they skipped, when there was a larger 
number of items (Figure 5d) but without increasing the 
duration spent attending to each item (Figure 5c). These 
findings suggest that skipping was sensitive to the prior 
probability that any one item would be attractive enough to 
be selected but that gaze duration was not.
4. Participants spent more time on an item, when they 
revisited it than when they visited it for the first time. this 
findings indicates that people may use an iterative 
deepening of attention [34]. This strategy may help 
participants to parse large amounts of information quickly 
using lower tolerance to rule out poor quality items and 
then focus effort on a smaller set. The difference between 
[34] and our study is that our participants didn’t sample all 
items before they started to revisit, especially in conditions 
with more pages (Figure 4b). This finding suggests that the 
set size of potential items may be constrained by the 
capacity limitation in memory. We also observed 
participants select an item at the first time visit before 
sampling all items. This indicated that people also picked 
an item immediately when the value of the item currently 
visited is beyond their satisficing criteria [38]. Adopting the 
coarse-to-fine strategy [27,33] and employing satisficing 
[38] could save lots of visual processing cost for sampling 
out poor items quickly and gain an item with satisficing 
value or gain a revisited item with acceptable value.
In sum, the results support the view that people adjusted 
their visual search strategy to their expectations of 
information gain, and that these expectations were 
contingent on (a) the density of items, and (b) the prior 
likelihood that an item is the one that they will want to 
select. In the remainder of the Discussion we first offer 
further explanations for the details of the findings, we then 
discuss some design implications.
Further Explanations
Why, for some designs, is it more efficient to use fewer 
longer gazes than more, shorter, ones? Essentially, because 
planning and executing gaze transitions, saccades, is
expensive. Planning and executing a new gaze so as to 
bring a foveal fixation to a new place requires effort, both 
mental and physical effort. Neurophysiological evidence 
indicates that making a saccade involves high cost neural 
processes to keep the visual scene stable (see [37] review). 
Therefore, to prolong an old gaze to gain information about 
an adjacent item can cost less than to plan and execute a 
new gaze. For example, in our experiment a new item visit 
took an extra 400 ms, but a longer gaze took only about 20 
ms more. Although each longer gaze takes more time, fewer 
gazes are required, reducing the overall visual search time.
Why was it not possible for participants to increase 
perceptual span to cover adjacent items in lower density 
displays? Findings reported by Hooge, Vlaskamp and Over 
[16] suggest that information can be gathered from a wider 
area of a display as gaze durations increase, i.e. it is 
possible that perceptual span is itself contingent on duration 
of fixation. However, there are clearly limits [4], and it 
appears as though the reduction in the rate that information 
can be acquired caused by the lower densities in our 
experiment pushed participants beyond this limit.
Will the findings generalise to other types of search result 
items? There is some evidence that the finding would 
generalise to word items. For example, Pollatsek, Perea 
and Binder [32] found that fixation duration is longer when 
a word with more neighbours than few neighbours. Longer 
fixation duration in a more dense display suggests that more 
information within the perceptual span is required to be 
processed serially. In contrast, Motter and Belky [24] 
showed that fixation duration didn’t change as the number 
of items within a 4° constant area and assumed that this 
result is because items surrounding a fixation are processed 
in parallel (number of items surrounded the fixation will not 
affect the fixation duration). These contrary results could be 
because of the relative complexities of stimuli in these two 
tasks are so different. Simple items, e.g. symbols, adjacent 
to a fixation can be processed in parallel, but complex items 
such photographic thumbnails in our task have to be 
processed in series and result in longer durations.
Why do the findings differ from previous research? The 
importance of ecological validity. The observed density 
effect on gaze duration and number of gazes are consistent 
with some previous studies [26], but contrary to others 
[4,15]. Unlike most of the previous studies, our target was 
not defined by only one or two visual features (color, shape, 
and orientation et al.) or non-words (non-words without 
semantic meaning can be searched by their shape or the 
order of characters), but was, instead, informed by the 
semantic description of a place. In contrast to these 
previous studies, participants in our study had to search a 
target based on aesthetic judgment. They spent longer gaze 
duration in our task than normal visual search task. These 
differences in the task environment may lead to the 
different results of the effect on search performance. 
Ecological validity is therefore crucial to understanding the 
constraints on visual search strategy.
1082
