CHI 2008 Proceedings · Search	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
On the other hand, we have chosen to control some 
variables that are confounded in studies of potential new 
designs. For example, in studies of hyperbolic browsers 
[30] item size and item density are confounded, i.e. items 
that are close together are also smaller than items that are 
further apart. Although this is perhaps, a natural confound 
for systems like hyperbolic browsers, failing to isolate what 
are otherwise independent factors will limit the generality 
of conclusions drawn from the data.
A downside of our effort to engage our participants in a 
meaningful task -- looking for attractive images of potential 
destinations -- was that there was a weak criterion for 
successful trial completion. The trial was over when 
participants indicated that they had found an attractive 
thumbnail but some participants may have used radically 
different thresholds for ‘attractive’ than others. In contrast, 
experiments in which participants were asked to find a 
particular item have a strong and measurable criterion for 
trial completion and moreover participants can make errors. 
Although we claim that our design reflects some part of the 
natural task ecology, it also reduces the strength of the 
conclusions that we can draw from the fact that participants 
took less time, overall, when items were presented with a 
higher density.
Design Implications
A persistent problem for HCI is that the exploration of new 
designs in the absence of adequate empirically grounded 
theory might lead to the rejection of the design on the basis 
of false negatives. Hyperbolic or other fish-eye view 
projections have, for example, had no impact on the way 
that most people use computer systems, despite the huge 
research investment over many years. It is tempting to take 
this fact as evidence that hyperbolic browsers are not fit for 
purpose. However, an alternative reason for their failure to 
find a role might be that the particular design instances are 
not tuned to the detailed constraints and adaptive capability 
of the human visual system. Hyperbolic browsers that fail 
to let people adapt to the constraints and capabilities 
imposed by their visual system are unlikely to succeed. 
Careful empirical investigation in response to well-formed 
theory and motivated by the ecology of user’s real task 
environments may have the potential to address this 
problem.
For example, although users might adapt their search 
strategy to achieve the highest payoff given a particular 
thumbnail density, some layout designs are better for 
decreasing of total search time and manual response time. 
The results reported above suggest the high density (3 
pixels gap between thumbnails) can facilitate search.
Interestingly, even higher densities than we have explored 
in this paper are unlikely to produce further gains. Previous 
work [21] has suggested that when the spacing between 
icons is zero pixels search becomes more difficult. 
Thumbnails require at least some space for visual search, 
which perhaps reflects common intuitions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported by an Overseas Scholarship 
Scheme (OSS) Award from the University of Manchester 
and a Manchester Business School Award to Yuan-Chi 
Tseng and Office of Naval Research grant (N00014-03-1- 
0087) to Andrew Howes.
REFERENCES
1. Anderson, J.R. The Adaptive Character of Thought. 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1990.
2. Anderson, J.R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M.D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., and Qin, Y. An integrated theory of the
mind. Psychological Review 111, 4 (2004), 1036-1060.
3. Araujo, C.C., Kowler, E.E., and Pavel, M.M. Eye 
movements during visual search: the costs of choosing 
the optimal path. Vision Research 41, 25-26 (2001), 
3613-3625.
4. Bertera, J.H. and Rayner, K. Eye movements and the 
span of the effective visual stimulus in visual search. 
Perception &amp; Psychophysics 62 (2000), 576-585.
5. Brumby, D.P. and Howes, A. Good enough but I’ll just 
check: Web-page search as attentional refocusing. In 
Proc. ICCM 2004, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 
(2004).
6. Brumby, D.P. and Howes, A. Strategies for guiding 
interactive search: An empirical investigation into the 
consequences of label relevance for assessment and 
selection. Human-Computer Interaction (in press).
7. Cockburn, A., Gutwin, C., and Alexander, J. Faster 
document navigation with space-filling thumbnails. In 
Proc. CHI 2006, ACM Press (2006), 1-10.
8. Cox, A.L. and Young, R.M. A Rational Model of the 
Effect of Information Scent on the Exploration of 
Menus. In Proc. ICCM 2004, Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates (2004).
9. Cutrell, E. and Guan, Z. What are you looking for? An 
eye-tracking study of information usage in Web search. 
In Proc. CHI 2007, ACM Press (2007).
10.Eng, K., Lewis, R.L., Tollinger, I., Chu, A., Howes, A., 
and Vera, A. Generating automated predictions of 
behavior strategically adapted to specific performance 
objectives. In Proc. CHI 2006, ACM Press (2006), 621- 
630.
11.Everett, S.P. and Byrne, M.D. Unintended effects: 
Varying icon spacing changes users&apos; visual search 
strategy. In Proc. CHI 2004, ACM Press (2004), 695- 
702.
12.Findlay, J.M. and Gilchrist, I.D. Active vision-the 
psychology of looking and seeing. Oxford University 
Press, 2003.
13.Fu, W.-T. and Pirolli, P. SNIF-ACT: A Cognitive 
Model of User Navigation on the World Wide Web. 
Human-Computer Interaction 22 (2007).
1083
