CHI 2008 Proceedings · Search	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
[5,6,13]. These finding support the view that search and 
selection is guided by maximising the expected information 
gain [8]. Strikingly there is evidence that maximising 
expected gain can involve fixating on every other item in a 
list, rather than fixating on contiguous items [5,6], 
particularly in contexts where good results have already 
been encountered.
In a number of respects people appear to be sensitive to the 
expected information gain of information gathering actions. 
In the following section we review in more detail the 
literature on the trade-offs that contribute toward the 
efficiency of information gathering actions during visual 
search. We are interested in the broad class of interactive 
search tasks [28] but our particular focus is on the visual 
search strategies and decision-making processes that people 
use when looking through items returned by an image 
search engine such as Flickr or Google. Further, we are 
interested in everyday tasks with somewhat underspecified 
target criteria, e.g. look for attractive images of the city 
Florence. In what follows we consider the relevance of the 
visual search and HCI literature to understanding these 
kinds of task.
RELATED WORK
Visual Search in HCI
Researchers in HCI have suggested that the details of 
interface design affect visual search strategy (e.g., 
[11,15,30]). Everett and Byrne [11], for example, suggested 
a small difference of 1.6 degrees of visual angle between 
items can result in participants either fixating on an icon or 
not. Similarly, Halverson and Hornof [15] provided 
evidence that low density, task-meaningless large words 
could lead participants to use fewer and shorter fixations 
and so shorter overall search time than when given high 
density, small, task-meaningless, words. Similarly, Pirolli, 
Card, and Van Der Wege [30] found that participants used 
more but shorter fixations when using a Hyperbolic browser 
than when using a standard browser, especially in areas of 
the Hyperbolic browser in which small, low information 
scent items, were grouped closely together.
Visual Search in Experimental Psychology
In the visual search literature, there is compelling evidence 
that the density of items on the display has consequences 
for search strategy. Ojanpää, Näsänen and Kojo [26] found 
that decreased spacing in a vertical list of words (common 
Finnish verbs, nouns and adjectives) resulted in longer but 
fewer numerous fixations. Vlaskamp, Over and Hooge [40] 
found that the fixation duration, number of fixation and 
search time increased dramatically with decreasing item 
spacing, as the range of spacing smaller than 1.5° visual 
angle. On the other hand, their data showed that at wide 
spacing range between 1.5° to 7.1° fixation duration, 
number of fixations and search time increased slightly as 
the spacing increased. Bertera and Rayner [4] found that as 
the item spacing increased the number of fixations and 
fixation duration increased.
Although allowing a high degree of experimental control 
the tasks [4,26,40] lack ecological validity. For example, 
Vlaskamp, Over and Hooge [40] used abstract shapes (e.g., 
squares) in their search task, and, Bertera and Rayner [4] 
used an unstructured alphanumeric array. Ojanpää, Näsänen 
and Kojo [26]) used common-words, which reduced the 
task to a simple visual pattern match, rather than a match of 
information scent but it is known that search behaviour is 
contingent on label relevance [5,6]. The different materials 
may account for the different effects. Both tasks are far 
from the real HCI task in which the stimuli are more 
heterogeneous and complicated.
Strategy Change during Search
Visual search strategies are also known to change during 
the course of a search [27,33]. Over, Hooge, Vlaskamp and 
Erkelens [27] found that fixation duration increased and the 
amplitude of saccade decreased gradually as search 
progressed. They called this is a coarse-to-fine strategy. 
Rao, Zelinsky, Hayhoe and Ballard [33] used a coarse-to-
fine matching mechanism to model the skipping saccades 
because it could increase the probability of an early match. 
In contrast, Brumby and Howes [6] found a fine-to-coarse 
search strategy. People increased saccade amplitude once 
they had found, but not committed to, a highly relevant 
target suggesting that although it is known that strategy can 
change, the reasons for change are not always clear.
Also, it is known that people spend more time examining 
items that are presented nearer to the top of the returned 
search results [9,13], presumably, and in part, because 
search engines tend to rank order results. However, what is 
not clear is whether people change visual search strategy as 
they examine links further from the top of the results list. 
For example, they may be more likely to skip i.e. fixate 
alternate, non-adjacent, items once a potential hit has been 
found, as was observed in [6].
THEORY
We assume that people make strategic adaptations in order 
to improve the efficiency of visual search, that is that they 
rationally adapt the strategy, given cognitive, perceptual, 
and motor constraints, to maximise benefits while 
minimising costs [1,8,17,28,29]. More specifically, people 
adapt their eye movement strategy to maximise the 
expected gain of task-relevant information and minimise the 
neural resources devoted to memory [25] and cognitive and 
attentional load [3]. In this paper, we take an “active vision” 
approach [12] to understanding the complex interactive 
behaviours that people exhibit when searching for 
information. Understanding these behaviours requires 
bridging between theories of visual search, visual 
exploration, and decision-making.
Following Cox and Young [8] we assumed that people are 
sensitive to the prior probabilities that any particular item 
will be the target item. Cox and Young operationalised this 
assumption by assuming that prior probabilities were
1076
