CHI 2008 Proceedings · Search	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
The Adaptation of Visual Search Strategy to Expected
Information Gain
Yuan-Chi Tseng
The University of Manchester
MBS Crawford House 2.30, Booth Street West,
Manchester, M15 6PB, UK
yuan-chi.tseng@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
An important question for Human-Computer Interaction is 
to understand how and why visual search strategy is 
adapted to the demands imposed by the task of searching 
the results of a search engine. There is emerging evidence 
that a key part of the answer concerns the expected 
information gain of each of the set of available information 
gathering actions. We build on previous research to show 
that people are acutely sensitive to differences in the density 
and in the number of items returned by the search engine. 
These factors cause shifts in the efficiency of the available 
information gathering actions. We focus on an image 
browsing task, and show that, as a consequence of changes 
to the efficiency of available actions, people make small but 
significant changes to eye-movement strategy.
Author Keywords
Visual Search, Visual Exploration, Strategy, Cognitive 
Models, Decision Making, Image Search Results, 
Thumbnails, Eye Movement, Density, Spacing
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.2 Information Interfaces and Presentation: User 
Interfaces – Theory and methods; H.1.2 Models and 
Principles: User/Machine Systems – Human Information 
Processing; H.3.3 Information Storage and Retrieval: 
Information Search and Retrieval – Selection process
INTRODUCTION
An important question for Human-Computer Interaction 
(HCI) is how to design the presentation of search results to 
facilitate visual search behaviour [9,20,35]. Researchers 
have proposed many alternatives to the standard list of 
results. They include Space-filling thumbnails of text [7], 
Tabular interface [36], Faceted category interface [42], and 
Textually-enhanced thumbnails [41].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
Andrew Howes
The University of Manchester
MBS East F31, Booth Street West, Manchester,
M15 6PB, UK
howesa@manchester.ac.uk
The number of proposals is, in part, a reflection of the scale 
of the design space. Identifying which of the potentially 
hundreds of interesting points in this space is best might be 
informed by a theory of how people choose to search 
through results, e.g. an ACT-R or EPIC theory of the 
cognitive, motor, and perceptual processing required to 
achieve the task [2,18,22,23]. Recent efforts to understand, 
what Payne, Howes and Reader [28] call interactive search 
tasks, have included [5,6,8,13,31]. However, it is 
sometimes difficult to ascertain which interface will be best 
when the details of the strategy that people will use given a 
particular task environment are unclear [10,14,17,19]. In 
this paper we are interested in the strategy choices that 
people make about visual search, i.e. how they choose to 
look at search results. Our focus is on the assumption that 
people attempt to maximise expected utility given the 
constraints of the human visual system [8,39] and that 
design changes which change the efficiency of information 
gathering actions will lead to changes in observed 
behaviour.
There is some evidence in the visual perception and 
cognition literature that visual search strategy is adapted to 
the demands imposed by particular task environments 
[4,26,40]. It appears that people seek to maximise the 
efficiency of visual search in the context of the particular 
display layout. For example, longer fixations enable more 
information to be gathered from fovea and peripheral 
vision, although longer fixations can only be effective if the 
information is available within the perceptual span [26]. 
Moreover, people need to manage the trade-off between the 
increased information gain of longer fixations and the effort 
and time cost of holding a fixation.
Some evidence that people adapt their strategy to the task 
can also be found in the HCI literature. For example, trade-
offs in the use of wide versus narrow spacing between icons 
[11], in more but smaller text versus fewer but bigger text 
in the same space [15] and in the use of Hyperbolic browser 
versus standard browser [30]. Even in a standard results 
layout, such as a simple list of links, there is evidence that 
search strategy is affected by the context in which the 
relevance of items is assessed [5,6,8,13]. The position of a 
target item in a list and relationship between the relevance 
of this target and distractor items affects search behaviour
1075
