CHI 2008 Proceedings · Search	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
PeerChooser: Visual Interactive Recommendation
John O’Donovan and Barry Smyth
School of Computer Science and Informatics
University College Dublin,
Ireland.
{firstname.lastname}@ucd.ie
Brynjar Gretarsson, Svetlin Bostandjiev,
Tobias H¨ollerer
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Barbara.
{brynjar, svetlin, holl}@cs.ucsb.edu
ABSTRACT
Collaborative filtering (CF) has been successfully de-
ployed over the years to compute predictions on items 
based on a user’s correlation with a set of peers. The 
black-box nature of most CF applications leave the user 
wondering how the system arrived at its recommenda-
tion. This note introduces PeerChooser, a collaborative 
recommender system with an interactive graphical ex-
planation interface. Users are provided with a visual 
explanation of the CF process and opportunity to ma-
nipulate their neighborhood at varying levels of gran-
ularity to reflect aspects of their current requirements. 
In this manner we overcome the problem of redundant 
profile information in CF systems, in addition to pro-
viding an explanation interface. Our layout algorithm 
produces an exact, noiseless graph representation of the 
underlying correlations between users. PeerChooser’s 
prediction component uses this graph directly to yield 
the same results as the benchmark. User’s then improve 
on these predictions by tweaking the graph to their cur-
rent requirements. We present a user-survey in which 
PeerChooser compares favorably against a benchmark 
CF algorithm.
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.4 Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g., HCI): Hyper-
text/Hypermedia—architectures
Author Keywords
Recommender systems, Visualisation, Interaction
INTRODUCTION
The idea behind recommender systems is to provide 
a user with a useful recommendation. Many recom-
mender systems use item or user-based [5] collaborative 
filtering (CF) techniques to generate their recommen-
dations. CF models the social process of asking a friend 
for a recommendation, making suggestions for some tar-
get user u from the items that are liked by users similar 
to u (user-based) or from items that have received simi-
lar ratings to the items that u likes (item-based). There 
are problems with the standard CF approach however. 
The so-called “grey-sheep” problem causes difficulties
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5 - 10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
when a particular user’s ratings history does not help 
to identify a set of similar recommendation partners. 
In addition, it is common for the user-item ratings ma-
trix to be sparsely populated, again making it difficult 
to confidently identify similar users and items, due to a 
lack of ratings overlap. CF techniques find it difficult to 
cope well with new or short-lived items since such items 
cannot be recommended until they have been rated by 
a critical mass of users.
In this paper we focus on the way CF systems identify 
user communities or peer groups as the basis for rec-
ommendation. Very often this is opaque to the users 
of a system. We suggest that users need more con-
trol in order to tailor recommendations to their current 
moods and influences; for example, in a movie recom-
mendation system a user may want to select Stephen 
Spielberg’s profile as a recommendation partner if they 
were in the mood for a science fiction movie, however 
if a user could assess Mr Spielberg’s recommendations 
on a set of items well known to that user, the deci-
sion to include him as a peer may change. Accordingly 
we show how users can influence peergroup formation 
by manipulating a visual representation of their current 
neighborhood, in order to fine-tune their recommenda-
tions. Figure 1 shows the architecture of PeerChooser 
with the feedback mechanism in the shaded area. At 
each tuning step, users are provided dynamic feedback 
in the form of recommendations on items well known 
to them. As such our PeerChooser system serves as 
explanation interface that provides users with a better 
understanding of the source of their recommendations 
and that helps to enhance overall user trust in the sys-
tem; see [2, 4].
VISUALIZING COLLABORATIVE FILTERING
Figure 2 shows a visualization of a CF process in Peer- 
Chooser. The main display includes the peer-graph 
which is centered on the active user. The active user’s 
neighbors are represented by the connected nodes such 
that the length of the connection between the active 
user and a neighbor is based on the similarity of their 
ratings profiles (using the standard Pearson’s Correla-
tion Coefficient). The precise positioning of nodes is 
governed by using a force-directed graph layout tech-
nique, similar to that presented in [1]. This models 
node connections as ‘springs’ which exert a force on 
their nodes that is inversely proportional to node simi-
larity and the systems settles to a zero-energy equilib-
rium state as the graph is visualized; in practice we have 
found this to provide accurate graph layouts in which
1085
