CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
% of all respondents who...	U.S.	Kenya
Identify as Christian	78	90
Identify as renewalist	23	56
Attend church at least once a week	44	80
Attend church more than once a week	16	33
Table 1. Selected religious indicators (from [29]).
example, unlike evangelicals, Pentecostals tend to affiliate 
with specific established denominations such as the 
Assemblies of God. Charismatics, while tending toward 
looser denominational affiliations than Pentecostals, share 
worship practices such as speaking in tongues and receiving 
of divine healings [18,29]. Despite these differences, 
renewalist and evangelical Christians share a strong 
commonality in their intense belief that the Bible is the 
word of God and should be interpreted literally. Moreover, 
it is this vibrant form of Christianity that is growing rapidly 
in developing regions and in Kenya (though Islam is often 
more prevalent elsewhere) [18].
Second, to the degree that one accepts an essentialist notion 
of “African traditional religions” (a set of cultural and 
spiritual beliefs indigenous to the African continent), 
contested by Western historians [31] but often alluded-to by 
our Kenyan informants and African scholars (e.g., [8,27]), 
it can be claimed that received traditional culture ties 
together religion and society:
Religion permeates into all the departments of life so fully that 
it is not easy or possible always to isolate it. A study of these 
religious systems is, therefore, ultimately a study of the 
peoples themselves ... [T]o be without religion amounts to a 
self-excommunication from the entire life of society, and 
African peoples do not know how to exist without religion. 
([24], pp. 1-2)
Thus, given our interest in understanding how religion in 
developing regions shapes how believers view and adopt 
ICT, Kenya provided a compelling site.
Methods and Participants
Data collection took place in two phases over a six-month 
period. First, we focused on understanding U.S. 
megachurches and their laity to get a sense for how 
parishioners were using technology; to become familiar 
with the religious terminology used by this population; and 
to explore how religion influences ICT adoption and use in 
a society with which we were familiar. Second, we 
undertook a six-week program of design-oriented fieldwork 
in Nairobi, Kenya.
In Atlanta we conducted semi-structured, at-home 
interviews with 16 individuals who attended area 
megachurches. We recruited megachurch laity, because 
like renewalist Christians, they tend to have a strong and 
vibrant faith, attend church and/or church related activities 
weekly, and are likely to subscribe to a literal interpretation 
of the Bible [18,36]. Participants were recruited using 
community email lists, personal contacts, and flyers
distributed at churches in the metro-Atlanta area. Almost 
all of the primary interviewees (11 women and 5 men) were 
adults in a variety of life-stages (from recent college 
graduate to retirees) and occupations. All attended 
megachurches and self-identified as Christians, half 
identifying with a specific denomination (e.g., Presbyterian, 
Baptist, etc.). Interviews were complemented by 
observational visits to Sunday morning services at ten 
metro-Atlanta megachurches.
In Nairobi, we conducted semi-structured, at-home 
interviews in 10 middle- and upper-middle-class 
households. We recruited these participants by using 
personal contacts that we had developed within the large 
Kenyan migrant community in Atlanta who introduced us 
to people in Nairobi. We later employed a snowball 
sampling technique to achieve a more diverse sample. 
Households were distributed widely throughout the greater 
Nairobi area, with some living an hour outside of the city. 
The interviewees (9 men and 7 women – we interviewed 
both husband and wife in 6 homes) were married working 
adults holding a variety of office occupations and raising 
school-age children. All participants self-identified as 
Christians and seven identified with a specific 
denomination. To complement the interviews we spent the 
night at a participant’s home, attended various social 
gatherings, and visited Sunday morning services at five of 
Nairobi’s largest churches. Furthermore to learn about the 
organizational context of religious life in Kenya, eight 
office interviews were conducted with pastors at some of 
Nairobi’s largest Protestant churches.
In both groups, interviews typically lasted one to one-and-
a-half hours and included a tour of relevant parts of the 
home or office. All participants were asked about how their 
faith and religious activities interact with their daily life and 
technology use. To gain additional insights from a design 
perspective, we used pre-prepared photo-cards to elicit 
stories about faith and technology use from our Kenyan 
participants [15].
The corpus on which our findings are based includes 35 
transcribed interviews, 70 pages of fieldnotes and over 
1000 photographs. Standard techniques for extracting 
analytic points, thematic clustering, and intermediate 
memo-writing were used in the course of the analysis. Data 
triangulation occurred across researchers, across media 
(e.g., fieldnotes, transcripts, artifacts) and across sites (U.S. 
and Kenya). We also made use of design sketching in our 
analysis (we will return to this later in the paper).
FINDINGS
In this section we discuss the findings from our data 
analysis. Broadly, we describe the consistencies within our 
two groups that are relevant to design. However, within the 
set of similarities were differences that were largely due to 
infrastructural disparities, by which we mean the lack of 
access to and availability of ICT and the infrastructure 
required to operate them (i.e., telephony and power) that
13
