CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Re-Placing Faith: Reconsidering the Secular-Religious
Use Divide in the United States and Kenya
Susan P. Wyche
Georgia Institute of Technology
85 Fifth St. NW
Atlanta, GA 30308 USA
spwyche@cc.gatech.edu
Paul M. Aoki
Intel Research
2150 Shattuck Ave., Ste. 1300
Berkeley, CA 94704 USA
aoki@acm.org
Rebecca E. Grinter
Georgia Institute of Technology
85 Fifth St. NW
Atlanta, GA 30308 USA
beki@cc.gatech.edu
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we report on design-oriented fieldwork and 
design research conducted over a six-month period in urban 
centers in the United States and Kenya. The contributions 
of this work for the CHI/CSCW community are empirical 
and methodological. First, we describe how recent design 
discourse around “designing technology for religion” 
creates an artificial distinction between instrumental and 
religious ICT use, particularly in developing regions. As 
illustrative examples, we relate three themes developed in 
the course of our fieldwork, which we term mindfulness, 
watchfulness, and embeddedness, to both “secular” and 
“religious” aspects of life in the communities studied. 
Second, we make a methodological contribution by 
describing how we used design sketches of speculative 
design concepts to extend and complement our fieldwork. 
By producing these sketches and soliciting feedback, we 
elicited additional data about how participants viewed the 
relationship between religion and ICT and prompted self- 
reflection on our own ideas.
Author Keywords
Domestic technology, religious technology, sketching
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
A recent flurry of SIGCHI activity – keynotes, workshops 
and sessions at CHI; a new column in interactions – signals 
a new research focus on design for developing regions. But 
what does it mean for the HCI community to engage with 
this agenda? It is not simply design for “international 
users,” nor is it simply design for “development,” with its
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00. 
emphasis on producing “appropriate” and “sustainable” 
technologies addressing goals such as poverty reduction. In 
both cases, pressure for immediate relevance tends to run 
counter to the usual strengths of academic research: a long 
time-scale, a tolerance for exploration and speculation, and 
a strong ethos of theoretical and empirical grounding. 
However, there are opportunities for HCI research that do 
exploit its natural depth and time-scale. An example is 
research on interface principles for computer users with 
limited literacy (e.g., [25,28]), a widely-acknowledged 
challenge for the adoption of information and 
communication technology (ICT) in developing regions.
We have chosen to examine the relationship between the 
design and use of ICT and a very different, but equally oft- 
remarked, societal trend in developing regions: the 
expansion of popular religion. In many countries, including 
key “emerging markets” such as Brazil, Nigeria and Kenya, 
the recent growth of revivalist forms of world religions 
(such as charismatic Christianity [29]) is challenging the 
Western idea that societies inevitably secularize over time 
[7]. The significance of this trend can be seen in estimates 
that by 2050 only about one-fifth of the world’s three 
billion Christians will be non-Hispanic Caucasians [4].
We are conducting a multi-year, multi-sited project 
involving design fieldwork in North America, Sub-Saharan 
Africa, and Latin America. The project focuses on the 
consumption and appropriation of ICT by evangelical and 
revivalist Christians, particularly those attending the kind of 
large, inclusive churches that that are commonly called 
megachurches1 in the United States (U.S.) [36]. 
Furthermore, we wanted to understand how users’ faith 
could inform and inspire concepts for speculative ICT 
devices. To be clear, the project is not aimed at producing 
“ICT for Christians.” Rather, taking for granted the 
importance of religious growth trends, our goal is to 
understand how faith-based worldviews affect adoption and 
use of ICT and how this is relevant in design. Users’ 
worldviews are of profound importance for designers, as 
the interface metaphors used, the worldview implicit in a 
system’s “usage model,” and the language used to describe
1 Megachurches are typically defined as those with 2000 or more regular 
attendees [36,37] and often emphasize rapid congregation growth.
11
