CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
discussion surrounds the development of written guidelines 
to assist smooth negotiations and to achieve acceptable 
compromises. For the Consensus policy, this type of 
discussion focuses on whether to use specific numbers for 
confirmation of consensus or not. That is, should the group 
need 80% or 75% of the population’s approval? Or should 
the policy simply state that general agreement is all that is 
required for consensus? An active member wants polling 
results to determine consensus, but he “loses” this effort in 
2005; consensus is explained through the organizational 
structure of the flowchart in Figure 3. In July 2007, 
someone starts adding the numbers requirement back into 
the Consensus policy, and the administrators talk about it 
and remove it each time. In August, there is more 
discussion of consensus versus the supermajority, and then 
it appears that it might be the original participant who lost 
the battle who is adding the numbers back to the policy, and 
even if it is not, he is actively participating in discussions to 
bring back the “numbers” [49].
As an example of the discussion leading away from 
decisions through polling, one administrator says, “for all 
but uncontroversial trivial propositions, it is unusual for 
decisions on Wikipedia talk pages to operate on a true 
consensus. Instead they operate on a rough consensus 
where it is recognised that a minority are in opposition. The 
question then arises is how large must the majority be to 
ignore the opinions of a minority?” [49].
When the policy is revised to respect the majority of 
decision makers, the discussion is titled, “The numbers 
came back again.” The first comment reads, “So I removed 
them.” The response to it, by the “losing” contestant says, 
“Did you not read the section above? There is not 
consensus to remove them,” in an assertion that previous 
decisions support this, but the response to this remark is: “I 
have read the section above. There is clearly no consensus 
to include them. Stop adding them,” reinforcing the 
community’s adherence to “rough consensus” as opposed to 
numerically-based decision-making.
Implications for Negotiated Settlements and Trophies 
Policies, therefore, reflect a continuous process of battles 
engaged in and won or lost, so that no conclusion is 
achieved. Much discussion of these policies includes a 
continuous recycling of old fights and unresolved 
contentions.
Rules and Policies as Control Mechanisms
To complete tasks and meet goals, rules and policies are 
often written to act as control mechanisms. Control is 
defined as any effort made to ensure appropriate action 
[31]. In the systems development literature, control has 
been defined more specifically from the behavioral sense as 
attempts to ensure that individuals on a project team act in 
accordance with a previously agreed-upon strategy to 
accomplish desired goals and objectives [21]. Control 
mechanisms are “devices used by controllers to ensure
proper controllee behavior” [20]. Both formal and informal 
control modes rely on control mechanisms to influence 
behavior, but formal modes control via performance 
evaluation and rewards while informal modes control via 
socialization to reduce goal differences [20]. Wikis draw 
upon informal modes of control by writing policies which 
describe ideal work output or behavior.
Explicitly highlighting this role of rules and policies also 
allows for consideration of ways that rules are used to 
manage divergence of individual and organizational goals, a 
phenomenon that is an important element of organizational 
evolution.
Control Mechanisms in Wikipedia
Wikipedia’s hierarchy of roles creates a class of people who 
apply the control mechanisms for the group: the 
administrators. Though, it is sometimes claimed that this 
hierarchy does not exist. Administrators are the only ones 
who can, as the Wikipedia site suggests, “protect and delete 
pages, block other editors, and undo these actions as well.” 
Also, in its categories of policies, Wikipedia devotes an 
entire section to what it calls, “enforcement,” a term for 
controlling the behavior of others. Two in this section that 
require administrator participation are Deletion and 
Blocking. Since control mechanisms ensure consistency 
between the goals and actions of the individual and those of 
the community, and since the goals of individuals are 
sometimes destructive, such as vandalism, a policy like 
Blocking prevents chronic disrupters from damaging the 
group or its efforts. Blocking is the term for the prevention 
of editing rights for those participants who refuse to support 
the goals of the organization. An interesting feature of the 
Blocking policy ameliorates its punitive approach: it is not 
meant for “retaliation,” but instead for “encouraging” 
appropriate behavior. A control mechanism of this sort, 
therefore, guides normative behavior rather than punishes 
deviance.
The Three-Revert Rule (called a “rule” but considered a 
“policy” by Wikipedia) is a community-specific control 
mechanism. It states that an editor may not make more than 
three changes to an encyclopedia page within a twenty-four 
hour period. The stated purpose for this policy is to prevent 
what the group calls “edit wars,&quot; or conflicts between two 
or more editors over an entry that result in the constant 
effort to assert the validity of one version of it over another. 
Administrators established this rule because, as Wikipedia 
founder Jimbo Wales says, “revert warring has become an 
absurd drain on us.” This control mechanism, therefore, 
protects the administrators from overload created by editors 
who refuse to negotiate about the contents of an entry.
Implications for Control Mechanisms
Where coordination assumes that all participants in a 
community have the same motives and merely need to 
understand how to get something done in terms of sequence 
or procedure, control suggests to the community what not to 
do and establishes rules of prevention of behaviors that will 
disrupt the process of the organization. These mechanisms
1107
