CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
A case where a process was “policy-fied” to accomplish 
these goals is the policy outlining the Criteria for Speedy 
Deletion [50]. The deletion policy is written exclusively for 
administrators, for they are the only community members 
empowered to determine what pages should remain in 
Wikipedia and what pages should be removed. This policy 
is written in extensive form and with multiple categorized 
subsections to accommodate the autonomy of the 
administrators and to support consistency in their decision 
making. Written policies of this sort ensure coordination 
among administrators and prevent arbitrary decisions. 
Additionally, written policies establish guidelines for 
behavior so that each decision does not require the endless 
time expense of lengthy discussion and consensus 
development.
Implications for Rational Efforts to Organize or Coordinate 
Wikipedia policies and guidelines can be seen as intentional 
efforts to solve coordination and communication problems 
by either eliminating the need for direct coordination or 
communication or significantly reducing the costs of such 
communication. Reduction of costs is often achieved by 
codifying the interaction, and hence, reducing the effort 
needed to engage in the exchanges. These mechanisms 
remain important even though communication and 
coordination costs are lower (at least theoretically) because 
of the technology infrastructure due to issues such as 
information overload [17]. At least for large scale wikis, 
such as Wikipedia, the need for organizational mechanisms 
to reduce communication and coordination cost remains.
Rules and Policies as Evolving, Competing, Self- 
propagating Entities
Rules can be seen as self-propagating entities that are the 
result of an evolving, competitive process. This perspective 
rejects the idea of intention, design, and agency as the 
primary drivers of policy development, largely because of 
the bounded rationality of individuals and high levels of 
complexity in the organizational system. Instead it is 
argued that rules are the result of competition for shifting 
attention. This results in systems of policies in which 
dynamics of rule development have the following features:
•	Rules generate more rules (either exponentially, linearly, 
or at a declining rate)
•	Areas or problems can be saturated, so modification or
adaptation of rules will drop off as the space gets 
“populated”
•	Developing manner rules in one area will draw attention
and people from other areas [29]
Evolving, Competing, Self-propagating Entities in Wikipedia 
For Wikipedia, the basic conditions of this perspective 
definitely apply. Wikipedia is an extremely complex system 
of documents, people, roles, policies and guidelines, yet 
individuals possess bounded rationality [39]. This suggests 
that we should see these kinds of dynamics of rules in the 
formation and modifications of the policies and guidelines 
in Wikipedia, and the archives bear this out.
One useful measure of increased complexity is the change 
in lengths in terms of word count alone of the policies from 
the first version to most current. All policies studied grew 
enormously.
•	Copyrights: 341 words 4 3200 words: 938%
•	What Wikipedia is not: 541 words 4 5031 words: 929%
•	Civility: 1741 words 4 2131 words: 124%
•	Consensus: 132 words 4 2054 words: 1557%
•	Deletion: 405 words 4 2349 words: 580%
•	Ignore all rules: exceptional case
The first version of the Ignore all rules policy is only 23 
words long, stating, “If rules make you nervous and 
depressed, and not desirous of participating in the Wiki, 
then ignore them and go about your business” [45]. The 
current version is actually shorter, only 16 words, and says, 
“If a rule prevents you from working with others to improve 
or maintain Wikipedia, ignore it” [45]. However, as 
suggested earlier in this paper, while the actual wording of 
this policy declined 69% and it appears on the surface to be 
the least bureaucratic of the policies, the supplemental page 
directly linked to this policy contains 579 words, indicating 
that the policy swelled over 3600% [45].
The Deletion policy appears to grow less than most of the 
other policies, but this statistic is misleading as the deletion 
policy is continually broken down into smaller 
subcategories in order to prevent discussion of particular 
instances of deletion decisions from appearing on the 
general policy page. The Deletion policy, therefore, is a 
policy of tremendous proliferation and complication.
Increased complexity is apparent in the Copyrights policy, 
among others, where the diction and syntax emulate that of 
legal documents. The first version of the policy, for 
instance, starts with: “The goal of Wikipedia is to create 
information that is available to everyone.” The current 
version, starting after a disclaimer note, begins: “The 
license Wikipedia uses grants free access to our content in 
the same sense as free software is licensed freely.” The 
earlier version uses simple sentence construction and 
vernacular diction. The current one relies on words from the 
legal profession, such as license, grants, access, and later in 
the policy, permission, obligation, rights.
Implications for Evolving, Competing, Self-propagating 
Entities
This role of rules and policies is necessary because it 
attempts to take the complex system that is Wikipedia and 
make it manageable. The evolutionary aspect of this role 
also promotes the continuous updating and modification of 
rules, which is needed in this type of dynamic environment.
Rules and Policies as Constructions of Meaning and 
Identity
Rules and policies answer questions about “who we are” 
[29]. They also indicate the way things “should be” (i.e., 
ideals). Lastly they serve to define and exemplify the “talk”
1104
