CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
of the place. Previous work has looked at the role of shared 
group and community identity [2, 12, 14] and individual 
identity [18, 30, 37] construction.
Constructions of Meaning and Identity in Wikipedia
For Wikipedia this includes policies that serve the purpose 
of defining what Wikipedia is and is not, either explicitly 
(e.g., What Wikipedia is not page) or through the 
articulation of policy pages on community principles (e.g., 
Ignore all rules page).
Meaning and identity are also likely to be reflected in 
discussions of policy changes that center on whether or not 
something is consistent with the “core principles” of 
Wikipedia. An example of these discussions is that which 
centers around the Neutral Point of View policy. This 
policy contains detailed definitions of bias, carefully 
organized guidelines for how to maintain neutrality in an 
article, and specifically outlined procedures for handling 
conflicts [51]. The archived discussion pages on this policy 
are so voluminous that many of them contain the 
discussions held within only one or two days [51].
The What Wikipedia is not policy sets up a clear sense of 
identity, but less through a description or definition of it 
(i.e., what we are) than through a negative approach. This 
policy is divided into three sections: Style and Format, 
Content, and Community. The first section differentiates 
Wikipedia from printed and published encyclopedias that 
are written by paid experts. The second section defines the 
term encyclopedia. The third one is perhaps the most 
illustrative of the identity of the group, however, for it lays 
out explicitly norms for community behavior, and for the 
purposes of this paper, “Wikipedia is not a bureaucracy” is 
the section most directed towards policy. Interestingly, it 
denies the bureaucratic nature of this organization: 
“Wikipedia is not a moot court, and rules are not the 
purpose of the community. Instruction creep should be 
avoided. A perceived procedural error made in posting 
anything, such as an idea or nomination, is not grounds for 
invalidating that post. Follow the spirit, not the letter, of 
any rules, policies and guidelines if you feel they conflict. If 
the rules prevent you from improving the encyclopedia, you 
should ignore them. Disagreements should be resolved 
through consensus-based discussion, rather than through 
tightly sticking to rules and procedures.”
The irony of this statement is that discussion surrounding 
policy development and modification turns to policy for 
support on a regular basis. The Three-revert rule policy, for 
instance, refers to the Copyrights, Spamming, Non-free 
content, Biographies of living persons, Blocking, and 
Consensus policies in its statement alone, with reference to 
those and other policies and guidelines proliferating 
through the discussion pages.
Implications for Constructions of Meaning and Identity
Rules in this role allow the wiki and its users to develop a 
sense of identity and meaning, which can be viewed, 
literally and figuratively, by new and current editors. These 
editors can then measure their fit with the community and 
decide on their intended level of participation. For 
example, someone looking for a wiki focused on social 
interaction may not be satisfied with one which focuses on 
purely identity formation [36]. In a volitional environment, 
such statement of meaning, values, and identity can become 
highly influential and rallying.
Rules and Policies as External Signals
Sometimes rules are ways of indicating to outside 
stakeholders or concerned parties that things that they care 
about are being attended to. The rules can be symbolic; can 
reflect action, or both. It is possible to discern these 
responses through media coverage of Wikipedia that 
provoked changes in policies or the creation of new ones.
External Signals in Wikipedia
For Wikipedia, the Copyrights policy illustrates a rule 
acting as an external signal. Based on an analysis of the 
Copyrights guidelines, it appears they were developed in 
response to external complaints or concerns about the 
unpermitted use of protected material [47]. It is perhaps 
because of this external stimulant that this policy’s 
discussion pages, while devoted extensively to copyright 
rules in general, often devolve into discussions of particular 
cases, especially those concerning images [47]. Also, 
perhaps because of the need to signal recognition of an 
issue by Wikipedia, this page developed from a simply 
stated list of rules into a more extensively organized but 
also more linguistically complicated treatise, as mentioned 
above. The language evolved from simple sentence 
structures and vernacular style into the more complicated 
grammars and dictions of the legal profession, possibly due 
to the hiring of general counsel [8], but also as the need for 
greater credibility and as a reflection of the community’s 
pressures to protect itself and its reputation from outside 
attacks or influences.
Another example of a policy acting as an external signal, or 
at least being heavily oriented toward external stakeholders, 
is the Biographies of living persons policy [46]. Notable 
characteristics of this policy include:
•	It includes full contact information for Jimmy Wales as 
the “Designated Agent” (which references specific 
requirement of US Law) unlike the other policies. It also 
includes a link to the Wikimedia Foundations Board of 
Trustees in a related readings section.
•	It explicitly references external legal structures
requirements (“Such material requires a high degree of 
sensitivity, and must adhere strictly to the law in Florida, 
United States and to our content policies”). The other
1105
