CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Don’t Look Now, But We’ve Created a Bureaucracy:
The Nature and Roles of Policies and Rules
in Wikipedia
Brian Butler
Katz Graduate School of
Business, University of
Pittsburgh
bbutler@katz.pitt.edu
Elisabeth Joyce
Edinboro University of
Pennsylvania
ejoyce@edinboro.edu
Jacqueline Pike
Katz Graduate School of
Business, University of
Pittsburgh
jpike@katz.pitt.edu
ABSTRACT
Wikis are sites that support the development of emergent, 
collective infrastructures that are highly flexible and open, 
suggesting that the systems that use them will be 
egalitarian, free, and unstructured. Yet it is apparent that 
the flexible infrastructure of wikis allows the development 
and deployment of a wide range of structures. However, we 
find that the policies in Wikipedia and the systems and 
mechanisms that operate around them are multi-faceted. In 
this descriptive study, we draw on prior work on rules and 
policies in organizations to propose and apply a conceptual 
framework for understanding the natures and roles of 
policies in wikis. We conclude that wikis are capable of 
supporting a broader range of structures and activities than 
other collaborative platforms. Wikis allow for and, in fact, 
facilitate the creation of policies that serve a wide variety of 
functions.
Author Keywords
Wikis, Wikipedia, community, collaboration, policy, 
policies, rules, dynamics.
ACM Classification Keywords
K.4.3. [Computers and Society]: Organizational Impact – 
Computer-supported collaborative work, H.5.3 
[Information Interfaces]: Group and Organization Interfaces 
- Collaborative computing, Web-based interaction, 
Computer-supported cooperative work, H.3.5 [Information 
Storage and Retrieval]: Online Information Systems.
INTRODUCTION
“The Wikipedia online encyclopedia — written by 
thousands of individuals working without a boss – shows 
the way... ” [28]
Wikipedia is characterized by many as emergent, complex,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00 
messy, informal, popularly uncontrolled, non-
organizational, and radically different from traditional 
organizations [5, 11, 22, 42, 52, 53]. Consistent with this 
characterization, one of the founding principles of 
Wikipedia is “Ignore all rules,” which states that if a rule 
inhibits developing Wikipedia, the contributor should 
ignore it [45].
Yet examination of the administrative structures of 
Wikipedia reveals a complex structure of rules, processes, 
policies, and roles. There are 44 wiki pages in the 
“Wikipedia Official Policy” category as of September 
20071. There are 248 wiki pages categorized as “Wikipedia 
guidelines” which are organized into at least eight 
subcategories. In addition, these do not seem to be 
sufficient, since there are 45 pending proposals for 
guidelines and policies, not to mention the 200 rejected 
proposals for guidelines and policies.
Even the principle of “Ignore all rules,” labeled as one of 
the official Wikipedia policies, is not immune from such 
“development” [45]. While the “Ignore all rules” policy 
itself is only sixteen words long, the page explaining what 
the policy means contains over 500 words, refers readers to 
seven other documents, has generated over 8,000 words of 
discussion, and has been changed over 100 times in less 
than a year.
Studies of Wikipedia activities [5, 11, 42, 43] and 
anecdotal discussions among participants [49] suggest that 
these policies, rules, and guidelines play an important part 
in both the day-to-day operations and overall success of 
Wikipedia. These arguments are consistent with findings 
and arguments made with regard to other types of online 
collective action, such as online communities [19, 24, 32], 
open source development [15, 16, 26, 41, 44], and virtual 
organizations [1].
The purpose of this study is to propose a conceptual 
framework for understanding the nature and role of policies 
and rules within wikis. Drawing from prior studies of rules
1 All references to Wikipedia content are based on data 
exported from the site in September 2007. Since the 
policies undergo perpetual re-editing and reconfiguring, the 
data presented here represents a snap-shot.
1101
