CHI 2008 Proceedings · Usability Evaluation Considered Harmful?	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 1. The sketch to prototype continuum [3].
Figure 1 illustrates this, where it defines the extremes 
between sketches and prototypes along several continua [3]. 
By definition, a sketch – even if implemented as an 
interactive system – is a roughed out design. It will have 
many holes, deficiencies, and undeveloped attributes. In 
contrast, a prototype aids idea evaluation, either by 
validating it with clients as they try it out, or through 
usability testing. Consequently, premature usability 
evaluation of the sketch as prototype could, unsurprisingly, 
find significant problems that could kill the design outright, 
especially if a novel design is compared to one that is more 
conservative. This has implications to both product 
developers and researchers.
Getting the Right Design vs. Getting the Design Right 
On the flip side, premature usability evaluation of sketches 
may also encourage developers to solve any of the 
problems seen by iterative refinement, as this is what the 
‘design, implement, evaluate’ life cycle advocates. This 
leads to local hill climbing, where much effort is expended 
in ‘Getting the Design Right’ (Figure 2a). Unfortunately, 
evaluation of early sketches is often at the expense of 
considering and / or developing other, perhaps better, ideas.
A sketch typically illustrates only one of many possible 
designs and variations under consideration. Early design 
demands many idea sketches, reflecting on this multitude of 
competing ideas, and choosing the one(s) that appear the 
most promising (Figure 2b). The promising idea is then 
further varied and developed until it can serve as a testable 
prototype. That is, sketching is about ‘Getting the Right 
Design’ [31,3]. Only afterwards does one work on ‘Getting 
the Design Right’ of a particular idea through iterative 
testing and development. Thus sketching is akin to a 
heuristic that helps one move closer to the global maxima 
by circumventing the local hill climbing problem.
Usability evaluation methodologies favored by interface 
developers confound this problem. Most, like think-aloud 
observations, task centered walkthroughs, and heuristic 
evaluation, tend to focus on the negative: Where are the 
problems? What are the bugs? They do not inform us about 
the benefits. Yet ultimately, the underpinning of a
a) Generating designs, choosing the right design, and then 
getting the design right
Figure 2. Sketching first, iterative design and evaluation later 
meaningful evaluation is a cost/benefit analysis. The 
problem with our methodologies is that cost (problems) is 
easier to measure than benefit, and this focus on problems 
risks biasing decisions far too early in the process. Some of 
our early buggy designs may actually be the one that has 
the most potential for benefit in the long run, but we have 
no way of knowing this.
Similarly, CHI researchers favor usability evaluation 
methodologies – especially controlled experiments – as a 
way to validate a new technique by comparing its usability 
(as measured by some performance metric) to a long- 
established technique. Again, this could quash a good idea 
simply because the design has not had a chance to evolve.
The net result is that we eliminate ideas too early, we 
consider far too few ideas at all, we converge on that which 
we can measure, which is almost always that which we are 
already familiar with. Our work degrades into a refinement 
of the known rather than innovation along new trajectories.
More generally, the ACM curriculum [17] suggests that 
design is an equal partner with evaluation. Yet the standard 
iterative cycle promoted within the CHI community is 
counter to traditional design practice. At issue is how the 
design/implement/test loop, if done naively, encourages the 
sequential evolution/refinement of ideas rather than the 
multiple parallel solutions that characterize most traditional 
design disciplines [3]. Usability evaluation should happen 
after multiple ideas are generated, critiqued, and 
considered. We include ourselves in this criticism, as we 
authored one of the first papers advocating an iterative 
approach to design [4], and promoted it in education [13].
USABILITY EVALUATION, INNOVATION AND 
CULTURAL ADOPTION
Invention and innovation is critical to CHI. In the small, 
they can significantly alter how we interact with a 
technology. In the large, new technologies and innovative 
interfaces can create a radical shift in the way we socialize, 
work, and play. Yet usability evaluation methods as done in 
research typically fails to consider the promise of novel 
engineering inventions and interface innovations. Similar to
a) Getting the design right
115
