CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
days old, is more likely to be read than the fourth post down 
on another blog, even if that post is from the previous day. 
This is somewhat similar to instant messaging 
conversations where time lapses between turns do not 
necessarily have an impact on the conversation [22]. Here, 
we introduce the term non-chronous to describe practices 
where individual events in one context, here a single blog, 
are considered in the temporal order in which they 
occurred, but not with regard to the specific time at which 
they occurred. This non-chronous approach does not mean 
that time-date stamps are utterly ineffectual, but they 
become much less important, especially with the advent of 
RSS aggregators, email clients, blog-host subscription lists, 
etc. For example, when Matthew falls behind on his regular 
blogs, he reads the five or so most recent posts in his RSS 
reader and his friends’ blogs. Patricia notes the time-
stamp’s existence in passing, but does not take it into 
account while reading. Generally, participants in this study 
do not see themselves as struggling to handle a deluge of 
information streaming through blogs–a missed post is not 
usually a missed opportunity.
Stepping back from the details of common blog reading 
practices, there are dramatic differences in how blog 
readers understand the visible object of their activity. When 
asked about motivations for reading blogs, participants said 
they visit blogs for information, inspiration, entertainment, 
and to a certain extent because it is just what they have 
always done. However, when asked the deceptively simple 
question, “what is a blog?” the responses were far more 
vague and varied. Patricia responded canonically, “well 
there’s the technical term and my own definition.” How 
does she determine which definition to use at what time?
“It Depends”
Among our respondents, the manner of reading and 
interacting with a blog depends on myriad factors 
including, among others, the content of the blog, the intent 
of the reader, the perceived intent of the blogger, and the 
relationship of the reader to the blogger. We argue that part 
of the reason for the great diversity in approaches to blog 
reading is the great diversity of blogs. Previous work, e.g., 
[11,21], has tried to classify blogs as a genre with certain 
structural and content-based divisions into sub-genres. 
However, our findings align more closely with boyd’s 
argument [2] that blogs are a medium, and that a variety of 
different activities and interactions can occur in and through 
that medium. Furthermore, drawing on reader-response 
theory [17], we argue that, in order to distinguish between 
different types of blogs, it may be less useful to look at the 
structure or content of the blog and more informative to 
follow the ways that readers read and interact with the blog.
The analysis presented here focuses on the following 
themes as dimensions along which approaches to blog 
reading may vary: the concept of a blog, perception and 
presentation of blogs, and “being a part” of blogs. From an 
analytic standpoint, uncovering data based on a consistent
definition of blogs seems to make intuitive sense, but given 
the fluid character of blogs it may be misleading to do so. 
Rather than trying to impose a definition of what counts or 
does not count as a blog, the authors strove for a more 
authentic, emic perspective by allowing our blog reader 
participants to decide what constitutes a blog. The styles of 
blogs that our participants read varied as much as the 
specific reading practices. These practices depend in large 
part on the reader’s approach towards, and perception of, a 
blog, which shape and reshape the activity of blogging 
itself. An example of this iterative process is Krish’s 
approach toward blogs; he generally views blogs as just 
another thing to do on the Internet when he’s bored. He 
calls himself a passive reader of blogs, unlikely to search 
out a new set of blogs despite his disappointment in the lack 
of content in the blogs he reads. However, during his blog 
reading activity Krish began to note points of interest in his 
hometown that were described in a blog. Now, when Krish 
returns home, he applies the knowledge he acquired online 
to his experience offline. Although Krish’s initial 
motivation for reading blogs shaped his self-labeled 
“passive reading” of blogs, his Internet-only experience 
reshaped itself into an activity with offline implications. 
Reader-response theory directs us to note the ways that 
individual readers read different blogs differently. While a 
blog reader may feel fine lurking on popular blogs, she or 
he may feel obligated to interact on the blogs of friends. 
Although examining format and content in order to 
categorize a blog may reveal a general understanding of a 
blog, this approach is likely to neglect the audience for 
whom the blog is, at least in part, intended.
What is a Blog?
Definitions of the term “blog” cited in the academic 
literature often resemble Herring et al.’s, “frequently 
modified web pages in which dated entries are listed in 
reverse chronological order” [10:1]. boyd [2] provides a 
survey of various definitions from dictionaries, researchers, 
mass media, and bloggers themselves. When we asked our 
participants, “what is a blog?” the responses were a mixture 
that pointed to updates, commenting capabilities, 
authorship, RSS feeds, personal content, etc. Unlike the 
bloggers boyd describes, there is little or no uniformity of 
definition among readers. For example Judith considered 
the notes on facebook.com and the blog option on 
myspace.com examples of blogs while many others did not 
agree. When asked to define a blog some participants did 
refer to the frequency of modifications, but there was no 
mention of dated entries or reverse chronological order. 
Rather than structural features, thirteen participants 
discussed interactional attributes. For many bloggers, a blog 
is not something you have, blogging is something you do 
[2]. However, among our participants, there was not such a 
clear distinction. For example, Patricia emphasizes the 
conversational nature of blogging:
A blog is something that’s still going on, that still has a 
conversation going on, that has people commenting, [it]
1115
