CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
reading into a more engaging, fulfilling experience. Future 
work should also compare blog reading to other routine 
media use, such as watching television, checking email, 
reading the newspaper, or listening to the radio.
Not Information Overload – Research on information 
retrieval (IR) and related areas often asserts that the copious 
quantity of information available leads to information 
overload, wherein overwhelmed users are unable to find 
relevant or important information in the ever-growing 
deluge. However, among this study’s participants, only two 
feel overwhelmed by the information content available to 
them. These readers do not feel the need to be constantly up 
to date with everything posted in the blogs they read. More 
studies should explore information overload, or lack 
thereof, from users’ perspectives in other contexts, so as not 
to spend research time developing IR algorithms that 
alleviate a problem not actually experienced by users.
Non-chronous – While readers experience blog posts in 
temporal order, the exact times of the posts does not 
significantly impact the reading activity. The recency of a 
post has more to do with the number of other posts that 
have occurred since the post in question than with the 
amount of time that has passed. Not only does this finding 
have implications for the design of blog reading tools with 
respect to determining what content users/readers will find 
important, but it also points to the ways in which 
technologies such as blogs influence perceptions of 
temporality. The passage of time here is marked by the 
occurrence of certain events, i.e., posts, such that the 
significance of a period of time and even the perception of 
how much time has elapsed are influenced by how much 
happens in that period, i.e., how many posts occur. Future 
studies should pay attention to the ways in which the design 
and use of other technologies and communication media, 
such as instant messaging, email, or Twitter, influence how 
users perceive and constitute the passage of time.
Identity– This paper builds on previous studies of online 
identity by exploring readers’ perceptions of bloggers’ 
identities. The findings here agree with previous ones, for 
example, that online and offline identities are not 
completely separate and distinct from one another [2,20], 
but there are also differences. For example, while previous 
work has looked at the obligations the blogger feels from 
his or her audience, this paper looked also at the obligations 
readers feel toward the blogger. Also, these findings 
indicate disconnects between the pressures felt by bloggers 
and the expectations of readers. While these findings 
provide future directions for exploring identity perception 
and presentation in social media and its connection to other 
aspects of interaction, such as privacy, appropriateness, and 
authority, they also suggest a design space for tools to allow 
more nuanced interactions between bloggers and readers.
“Being a Part” – Being a part of a blog involves regular 
reading, a feeling of community, and a sense of 
connectedness, though these aspects are neither necessary
nor sufficient. What it takes to be a part of a blog varies 
depending on the individual reader and the specific blog, 
especially whether it is a “big” popular blog or a personal 
friend’s blog. Based on these varied interactions between 
reader and blog, readership is defined and constituted 
differently in different contexts. Future work should 
examine the feeling of “being a part” both in different 
social media, such as YouTube or Wikipedia, as well as in 
instances where the division between authors and readers is 
more nebulous or even nonexistent, such as social 
networking sites or Twitter. Furthermore, it will be 
important to examine how participation in these and other 
online interactions impacts our definition of what it means 
to be a member of a community, both online and offline.
Interactional Approach – drawing on reader response 
theory [3,17] and recent trends in HCI research [5], the 
research presented here takes an interactional approach to 
studying blog reading, shifting the focus from structural, 
technical, or content-oriented aspects of blogs to the 
reader’s experiences with them. This approach leads to 
novel, reader-centered definitions of the term “blog” based 
on the types of reading and interaction it allows and 
encourages. Focusing on interaction also foregrounds the 
ways in which blogs are not a genre but a medium for 
multi-directional communication among bloggers and 
readers. Previous work focused predominantly on the 
blogger, and this paper focuses mostly on readers. Future 
work should take an integrative approach, looking at the 
same interaction from both the blogger’s and the reader’s 
perspectives, as well as looking at interactions between 
blog readers in specific contexts, such as political blogs, 
religious blogs, or mommy blogs. What interactional 
aspects of blogging, including both blogger and reader, are 
unique to each of these communities? What aspects 
transcend individual communities to characterize blogging 
in general? How do common practices from blogging 
impact social interaction in other contexts beyond blogs?
CONCLUSION
In examining the increasingly common social activity of 
blogging, we must consider the experiences, roles, and 
contributions of readers, even when less readily apparent 
than those of bloggers. This paper presents a qualitative 
study that focuses on blog readers, their reading practices, 
their perceptions of blogs and bloggers, and what it means 
to be a part of a blog. The findings presented here indicate 
that the activity of blogging, of which readers are an 
integral part, is far more heterogeneous and multifaceted 
than previously suggested. Even though ten of our fifteen 
participants are between 18-25 years old and eleven of 
fifteen are students, the ways in which they read blogs, and 
even their definitions of what constitutes a blog, are 
dramatically different. The analysis here draws on reader- 
response theory to argue that, rather than using structural or 
content-based features in order to classify blogs, it may be 
more informative to consider them in terms of interactional 
features and readers’ experiences. This focus resonates with
1119
