CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Exploring the Role of the Reader in the Activity of
Blogging
Eric Baumer	Mark Sueyoshi	Bill Tomlinson
Department of Informatics	Int’l Studies / East Asian Cultures	Department of Informatics
U of California, Irvine, USA	U of California, Irvine, USA	U of California, Irvine, USA
ebaumer@ics.uci.edu	msueyosh@uci.edu	wmt@uci.edu
ABSTRACT
Within the last decade, blogs have become an important 
element of popular culture, mass media, and the daily lives 
of countless Internet users. Despite the medium’s 
interactive nature, most research on blogs focuses on either 
the blog itself or the blogger, rarely if at all focusing on the 
reader’s impact. In order to gain a better understanding of 
the social practice of blogging, we must take into account 
the role, contributions, and significance of the reader. This 
paper presents the findings of a qualitative study of blog 
readers, including common blog reading practices, some of 
the dimensions along which reading practices vary, 
relationships between identity presentation and perception, 
the interpretation of temporality, and the ways in which 
readers feel that they are a part of the blogs they read. It 
also describes similarities to, and discrepancies with, 
previous work, and suggests a number of directions and 
implications for future work on blogging.
Author Keywords 
Blogging, blog readers.
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous; K.4.m. Computers and Society: 
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
By most indications, blogs are proliferating at an ever- 
increasing rate. Although specific figures vary among 
different sources [16,25] there is consensus that blogs have 
become an important, active, and influential part of online 
media. Research on blogging, e.g., [11,15,21], has revealed 
important insights about the activity of blogging, the 
attitudes of bloggers, and the practices surrounding blogs.
However, blogging is not a solo activity. While work has 
been done in areas such as analyzing conversations between
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00. 
blogs, e.g., [7,10], and applying social network analysis to 
blogs, e.g., [8,19], little work has been done examining the 
role of the reader in the blogging process. This gap is 
surprising, considering Nardi et al.’s prediction that “future 
research is sure to pay attention to blog readers” [21:231]. 
Furthermore, according to Lenhart and Fox [16], as of July 
2006, 57 million American adults read blogs, over a third of 
the 147 million who use the Internet. Sifry [25] puts the 
number of unique Technorati visitors at over 9 million in 
March 2007, up by over 50% from February 2007. Clearly, 
not only is the number of blogs increasing, but also the 
number of blog readers. The role of this ever increasing 
population of blog readers presents a promising and 
important, yet little-explored, area of research.
This paper is not the first call for a focus on readers. In the 
1960’s and 1970’s, a shift occurred in literary theory from 
focusing primarily on the literary object itself to including 
the reader’s response to the literature. Reader-response 
theory, or reader-response criticism, cf. [3,17], focuses not 
on the literature itself but rather on the audience’s response 
to, and interpretation of, the text. The reader is not a passive 
recipient of content, this critique argues, but rather engages 
in an active process of interpretation. Reality and meaning 
exist neither solely in the text nor solely in the reader, but 
are constructed through the dialectic interactions between 
the two. Similarly, the reality and meaning of a blog exists 
neither solely in the blog itself nor solely in the reader, but 
rather in the reader’s active interpretation of, and 
interaction with, the blog. Furthermore, technologies and 
practices such as commenting, linking, tagging, and 
trackbacks enable a level of explicit interaction with both 
the text and the author not available in previous textual 
media. This paper argues for a shift in the study of blogging 
similar to that in literary criticism represented by reader- 
response theory. This shift to emphasize the interactional 
aspects of blogging also fits into a larger trend in HCI 
research of moving from the user as information processor, 
to human actor, to embodied experiencer [5]. In order to 
understand the myriad contexts in which human-computer 
interaction takes place, researchers have adopted different 
stances toward users and taken different perspectives on 
HCI systems. Similarly, in order to understand fully the 
activity of blogging, we must study not only bloggers and 
the blogs they produce, but also the readers of those blogs 
and their interactions with the blog and the blogger.
1111
