CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Pseudonym	Age	Gender	Occupation	Regular Blogs	Frequency	Example Blogs	Years Reading	Tools
Connie	22	F	--	--	Every Day	--	--	--
Fern	19	F	Student	1-2	Every Other Day	xanga.com, blogspot.com, livejournal.com	5-6 Years	4, 5, AIM Profiles
Selena	18	F	Student	6-10	2-3 Times a Week	greatestjournal.com, myspace.com, xanga.com, asianave.com	6-7 Years	1, 4, 5
Charles	24	M	Admin. Assistant	6-10	Several Times a Day	dailykos.com, boingboing.net, blogspot.com, slashdot.org, poplicks.com	6-7 Years	1, 4
Lillian	33	F	Graduate Student	20+	Every Day	blogspot.com, indigirl.com/blog, carrieoke.net, doggedknits.com	4.5 Years	2
Judith	20	F	Student	3-5	Every Other Day	myspace.com, xanga.com, facebook.com	3 Years	4
Jill	20	F	Student	6-10	Several Times a Day	livejournal.com, flickfilosopher.com/blog, ingliseast.typepad.com/ingliseast	5-6 Years	1
Cindy	19	F	Student	1-2	Several Times a Day	xanga.com, livejournal.com	5 Years	4
Patricia	20	F	Student	1-2	2-3 Times a Week	sibol.in, mochix.com	4 Years	1, 2, 5
Natalie	25	F	Legal Assistant	11-20	Every Other Day	perezhilton.com, blogspot.com, myspace.com, livejournal.com	10 Years	1, 4, 5
Tony	31	M	Graduate Student	3-5	Every Day	slashdot.org, fark.com, treehugger.com, somethingawful.com	6 Years	1, 3, iGoogle
Matthew	26	M	Graduate Student	11-20	Several Times a Day	blogspot.com, firejoemorgan.com, kugelmass.wordpress.com, sadlyno.com	6 Years	1, 2
Laura	27	F	Admin. Assistant	3-5	2-3 Times a Week	mypapercrane.com, blogspot.com, livejournal.com, bloesem.blogs.com	2 Years	1, 4
Cheryl	24	F	Graduate Student	3-5	2-3 Times a Week	fourfour.typepad.com,	2-3 Years	1
						2manadvantage.com, nydailynews.com/blogs/mets		
Krish	22	M	Student	3-5	Every Day	metblogs.com, kiruba.com, blogspot.com, aparnasblog.wordpress.com	8 Months	1
Table 1 – Profile of participants. For tools, 1 is web browser, 2 is RSS aggregator, 3 is email client, 4 is blogging website, 5 is 
links from reader’s blog. Participants listed specific regular blogs, from which the authors generalized and chose examples.
quintessential part of going online. Whether one expects an 
email or not is unimportant, because one will check her or 
his email account not with the expectation of receiving 
email but rather as part of an Internet ritual.
Much work in information retrieval, search technologies, 
and related fields is based on the premise that the sheer 
volume of information available is simply overwhelming, 
often referred to as “information overload,” and that users 
feel compelled to try and stay on top of the ever increasing 
amount of available information. This attitude dates at least 
as far back as Barnaby Rich’s assertion, in 1613, that “one 
of the diseases of this age is the multiplicity of books; they 
doth so overcharge the world that it is not able to digest the 
abundance of idle matter that is every day hatched and 
brought forth into the world” (quoted in [4:63]). However, 
such a sense of information overload with respect to blogs 
was not common among our respondents. Only two of the 
fifteen, Charles and Lillian, expressed feeling overwhelmed 
by the potential information available through blogs. The 
other participants indicated that they are not bothered when 
they cannot stay current with the newest posts for the blogs 
they frequent. Some would eventually catch up on old posts
when the time suited them, while others simply choose the 
most recent or most interesting posts to read, skipping the 
rest. Laura reveals, “I don’t kill myself over it, because it’s 
not like I can’t always go back and see, ‘okay what 
happened two weeks ago’ ... I know what’s there and I 
know where to find it when I need it.” This attitude 
challenges the commonly accepted notion that users feel 
overwhelmed with staying constantly up to date.
It also raises interesting issues of synchronicity. Computer 
mediated communication is often considered either 
synchronous, e.g., live video or audio chat; near 
synchronous, e.g., instant messaging; or asynchronous, e.g., 
email. Clearly, there are not fine distinctions but rather a 
gradient from synchronous to asynchronous, and blogs are 
generally placed closer to the asynchronous end of the 
spectrum [21]. However, based on our participants’ 
descriptions, they do not read blogs in a temporally situated 
manner. When returning to a blog that has not been visited 
recently, it does not matter if the most recent three posts 
occurred in the past week, in the past day, or in the past 
hour. What matters is the order in which posts appear on the 
blog. The most recent post on one blog, even if it is several
1114
