CHI 2008 Proceedings · Usability Evaluation Considered Harmful?	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
response is ‘it has been done before; therefore there is little 
value added’.
What exasperates the “it has done before” problem is that 
this reasoning is applied in a much more heavy-handed way 
to innovative technologies. For many people, the newer the 
idea and the less familiar they are with it, the more likely 
they are to see other’s explorations into its variations, 
details and nuances as the same thing. That is, the 
granularity of distinction for the unknown is incredibly 
coarse. For example, most reviewers are well versed in 
graphical user interfaces, and often find evaluations of 
slight performance differences between (say) two types of 
menus as acceptable. However, reviewers considering an 
exploratory evaluation of (say) a new large interactive 
multi-touch surface, or of a tangible user interface almost 
inevitably produce the “it has been done before” review 
unless there is a grossly significant finding. Thus variation 
and replication in unknown areas must pass a higher bar if 
they are to be published.
All this leads to a dilemma in the CHI research culture. We 
demand validation as a pre-requisite for publication, yet 
these first evaluations are typically confirmatory and thus 
weak. We then rebuff publication or pursuit of replications, 
even though they deliberately challenge and test prior 
claims and are thus scientifically stronger.
Objectivity vs. Subjectivity
The attraction of quantitative empirical evaluations as our 
status quo (the 70% of our CHI papers as reported in [1]) is 
that it lets us escape the apparently subjective: instead of 
expressing opinions, we have methods that give us 
something that appears to be scientific and factual. Even 
our qualitative methods (the other 30%) are based on the 
factual: they produce descriptions and observations that 
bind and direct the observer’s interpretations. The 
challenge, however, is the converse. Our factual methods 
do not respect the subjective: they do not provide room for 
the experience of the advocate, much less their arguments 
or reflections or intuitions about a design.
The argument of objectivity over subjectivity has already 
been considered in other design disciplines, with perhaps 
the best discussion found in Snodgrass and Coyne’s 
discussion of design evaluation in architecture by the 
experienced designer-as-assessor [25]:
[Design evaluation] is not haphazard because the assessor has 
acquired a tacit understanding of design value and how it is 
assessed, a complex set of tacit norms, processes, criteria and 
procedural rules, forming part of a practical know-how. From 
the time of their first ‘crit’, design students are absorbing design 
values and learning how the assessment process works; by the 
time they graduate, this learning has become tacit 
understanding, something that every practitioner implicitly 
understands more or less well. An absence of defined criteria 
and procedural rules does not, therefore, give free rein to 
merely individual responses, since these have already been 
structured within the framework of what is taken as significant 
and valid by the design community. An absence of objectivity 
does not result in uncontrolled license, since the assessor is 
conforming to unspoken rules that, more or less unconsciously,
constrain interpretation and evaluation. If not so constrained, 
the assessor would not be a member of the hermeneutical 
community, and would therefore have no authority to act as an 
assessor. (p.123)
One way to recast this is to propose that the subjective 
arguments, opinions and reflections of experts should be 
considered just as legitimate as results derived from our 
more objective methods. Using a different calculus does not 
mean that one cannot obtain equally valid but different 
results. Our concern is that the narrowing of the calculus to 
essentially one methodological approach is negatively 
narrowing our view and our perspective, and therefore our 
potential contribution to CHI.
Another way to recast this is that CHI’s bias towards 
objective vs. subjective methods means it is stressing 
scientific contribution at the expense of design and 
engineering innovations. Yet depending on the discipline 
and the research question being asked, subjective methods 
may just as appropriate as objective ones.
A final thought before moving on. Science has one 
methodology, art and design have another. Are we surprised 
that art and design are remarkable for their creativity and 
innovation? While we pride our rigorous stance, we also 
bemoan the lack of design and innovation. Could there be a 
correlation between methodology and results?
USABILITY EVALUATION AND EARLY DESIGNS
We now turn to concerns regarding how we as practitioners 
do usability evaluations to validate designs. In particular, 
we focus on the early design stage where usability 
evaluation, if done prematurely, not only adds little value, 
but can quash what could have been promising design idea.
Sketches vs. Prototypes
Early designs are best considered as sketches. They 
illustrate the essence of an idea, but have many rough 
and/or undeveloped aspects to it. When an early design is 
displayed as a crude sketch, the team recognizes it as 
something to be worked on and developed further. Early 
designs are not limited to paper sketches: they can be 
implemented in a video, an interactive slide show, and as a 
running system as yet another way to explore the ideas 
behind a highly interactive system [3]. When systems are 
created as interactive sketches, they serve as a vehicle that 
helps a designer make vague ideas concrete, reflect on 
possible problems and uses, discover alternate new ideas 
and refine current ones [3,28,30,31].
The problem is that these working interactive sketches – 
especially when their representation conveys a degree of 
refinement beyond their intended purpose – are often 
mistaken for prototypes, i.e., an approximation of a finished 
product. Indeed, the HCI literature rarely talks about 
working systems as a sketch, and instead elevates them to 
low / medium / high fidelity prototyping status [3], which 
people perceive as increasingly suggestive of the finished 
product. Yet this perception may be inappropriate, for 
prototypes are very different in purpose from a sketch.
114
