CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
doesn’t have to be all the time, but it does have this dialogue 
between the person who’s posting and the people who are 
reading, yeah that’s a blog.... [When the conversation stops], 
by my definition, yeah it’s a dead site.
However, not all participants stressed conversational 
interaction. Providing another perspective, Natalie suggests 
that “a blog is a journal, like an electronic journal where 
people can express whatever they want, you know, and let 
everyone read it I guess.... it could be anything I guess.”
Many respondents referred to “getting” a Xanga or 
“having” a blog, which foregrounds the blog as a 
possession and backgrounds the interactivity and process of 
blogging. Eight participants varied in their usage of the 
term “blog”: sometimes it would refer to an individual blog, 
an individual post, e.g., “I write a lot of blogs,” or even an 
entire blog-hosting site, such as when participants include 
LiveJournal in the blogs they frequently read.
In Patricia’s definition, the interaction that occurs makes it 
a blog, while in Natalie’s definition the content makes it a 
blog. “It could be anything” demonstrates just how fluid the 
notion of blog can be. Another respondent, Tony, listed a 
series of technical requirements, including commenting and 
RSS, when asked if a particular website was a blog or not:
That website is [a blog], yeah, but it doesn’t have live 
comments from people who read it. It has message boards that 
are associated with it, but they’re not as directly linked with 
different page articles, I don’t know. It’s not a static page, I 
mean every week you go to it, it will have different articles, 
but it’s not exactly the same format as a blog, it does have an 
RSS feed though so you can see what’s new on it.
If readers and writers are both involved in the co- 
construction of the blog [21], how do differences in 
definitions impact this process?
As with boyd’s [2] respondents, many readers used 
metaphors to define the term blog, and the metaphors with 
which they attempt to make sense of blogs in turn affect 
their understanding of, perception of, and interaction with 
blogs. Seven of the fifteen participants referred to blogs as a 
newspaper or magazine, and ten of the fifteen used the term 
diary or journal to describe at least one blog they read. 
These data point to the problematic nature of basing 
research on blogging activity upon the traditional format- 
oriented definition of blogs. Although a blog’s format may 
invite a certain reading, reader-response theory helps us 
understand the actual interaction or lack of interaction that 
occurs between the blog reader and the blogger. Although 
definitions found in the research literature [11,21] can be 
useful from an analytic standpoint, they may be less useful 
or even misleading when trying to understand how the 
bloggers and readers themselves approach blogging. When 
seeking to understand blogging from the blogger’s or the 
reader’s perspective, the authors found it more useful and 
informative to consider blogs not in terms of academic 
definitions, but rather in the terms of those involved in the 
activity of blogging.
Presentation and Perception
Previous work [1,2,15,23] has explored how bloggers use 
blogs as a means of presentation of self (see [9]) online. 
This section explores the other half of that phenomenon, 
that is, how readers perceive the self that bloggers present. 
In some respects, these results align with previous findings. 
However, findings about our respondents also differ in a 
number of important ways from previous assertions about 
audience and perception in blogging.
Agreement with Previous Findings
Past work on authenticity, one aspect of bloggers’ 
presentation of self, illustrates that audiences of blogs hope 
and expect authenticity, and that without it readership will 
be lost (McNeil in [15]). For blogs, authenticity does not 
hinge upon the accuracy of information they present, but 
rather upon their interpretability. (Langellier and Peterson 
in [15]). Lenhart bases her conclusion on Langellier and 
Peterson’s examination of the persistent interpretability of 
narratives. Arguing that blogs are a form of narrative, she 
posits that the blog is perceived “as one person’s ‘take’ on 
an issue, one person’s perspective on a story, left open to 
the interpretation of, and evaluation by, the reader, rather 
than as an unbiased source of information” [15:58-59]. 
Among our participants, eleven described the blogs they 
read regularly as feeling authentic. Connie “definitely [gets] 
an inside look at their lives”, while Natalie feels like she is 
traveling alongside the bloggers who write about their 
travels. All thirteen of our participants who read single- 
authored blogs recognize that posts of the blogs they read 
regularly were either opinion or personal narratives, which 
are important components of the perception of authenticity.
Blogs are generally considered a one-to-many medium, but 
are often experienced by bloggers as one-to-one [15]. In 
this study, eight participants have experienced blogs as one- 
to-one communication between them and the blogger. 
Selena says, “for like some people..., I guess sometimes I 
feel like they’re writing to me.”
This study also shows that negotiations between online and 
offline identity for blog readers are similar to those of 
bloggers. Early research into online identity, e.g., [26], 
argued that people used online worlds to create alternate 
identities or to explore certain facets of their personality 
that were not as prominent. However, more recent work, 
e.g., [1,20], has pointed to the ways in which a person’s 
online identity is a part or an extension of their offline 
identity, such as the way that Trinidadians use the Internet 
as just another way of being “Trini” [20], and that 
attempting to sever the two can be misleading and 
confusing. Similarly, while blogs and “real life” 
experiences are still distinct realms for readers, there is a 
relatively tight coupling between readers’ online and offline 
identities. Describing one of her friends, Fern says that “the 
way he types is the way he talks and thinks,” and Lillian 
hesitates to refer to only her offline friends as her “real” 
friends. Were there a connection with Patricia’s online and 
offline life, she says, “I [would be] a little bit surprised and
1116
