CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
a little bit happy that there was this link between my online 
life that I publish online with just a typical school day that it 
could be considered that I’m still the same... my screen 
name versus me.” However, she is also wary of creating too 
strong a link between her online and offline identities. “I 
don’t want my dad to find me because there was this whole 
breakup thing [between my mom and dad] and he wasn’t 
such a good person.” While Lillian was initially cautious 
about linking her knit-blogging with her life as a graduate 
student, and she still does not give out her full name online, 
she also feels that her blogging activities are “a part of [her] 
and it’s not worth hiding it.” This sort of ambivalence was 
common among participants; they do not view the set of 
identities they construct through blog reading as identical to 
their set of offline identities, but they also do not view the 
two sets as totally disjoint; most of them continuously 
negotiate and redefine the relationship between the two.
Differences from Previous Findings
Previous work on blogs has overlooked several elements of 
presentation and perception, possibly due to its focus on 
bloggers as both producers and consumers of blogs. Blog 
readers are often perceived by bloggers as an unnerving and 
anonymous group of lurkers or instigators [15], placing 
expectations on the blogger, creating awkward social 
situations, or sometimes presenting an unwanted, invading 
presence [2]. However, blog readers often approach 
different blogs differently, and may contribute differently in 
different contexts. Each participant shared that she or he 
would variously comment, lurk, or instigate, depending on 
the blog. As for commenting, eleven respondents stated that 
they would semi-regularly encounter statements or 
sentiments with which they disagreed, but only four 
participants shared instances where their views differed 
significantly and decided to express their disagreement 
through comments. However, only one of these four would 
make comments with the aim of instigating an awkward 
situation or invading the blogger’s space. Lillian is of the 
opinion that “it’s not worth being negative.” She strives to 
ensure that “whatever comes out of [her] mouth... or what 
comes out of [her] fingers is positive.” Kirsh, though, said 
that he enjoys bashing on bloggers or simply kindling 
“flame wars” of nearly unfounded, ruthless arguments.
While previous research has described the expectations 
readers place on bloggers, readers feel that there are certain 
expectations of them, as well. According to Patricia, “a 
good post deserves a reply from the audience,” and Jill sees 
“[commenting] as a courtesy.” Furthermore, while some 
comments are used as simple, lo-fi communication or 
notification mechanisms (discussed further below), many 
readers spend a significant amount of time formulating their 
comments in order for them to be coherent and insightful. 
In the rare event that Charles comments, he needs “time to 
sit down and plot out a cogent response.” While bloggers 
feel pressures about the content and identity they present, 
readers feel pressures about ensuring that their comments 
make a significant contribution. Similarly, while bloggers
may feel pressured to update, ten of our participants felt 
obligated to read or comment, particularly on friends’ blogs 
or blogs of which they felt that they were “a part” (see next 
section). Selena “admits” that there are some posts, even on 
blogs of close friends, that she does not read. Lillian was 
relieved to learn that other readers did not follow every 
single post and skimmed many. However, while a reader 
can “get away” with not reading every post without much 
notice, it is more obvious when there are lapses on the part 
of the blogger. Though expectations and obligations may 
not be symmetrical, the activity of blogging nevertheless 
exerts social pressures on both bloggers and readers.
However, the situation with respect to readers’ expectations 
is somewhat more complex still. Thirteen respondents 
expressed expectations with regard to update frequency, 
visual style, navigability, responsiveness, appropriateness, 
and other aspects. However, just as readers read different 
blogs differently, they have different expectations of 
different blogs. Expectations are often more lax for friends’ 
blogs and greater for more popular “big” blogs. On the 
other hand, for example, when readers comment on these 
big blogs, they rarely expect a response, while a comment 
on a friend’s blog almost demands reciprocation. Natalie is 
interested in travel, and so often reads and comments on 
travel blogs. She does not expect the blogger to respond to 
her questions, but is pleasantly surprised when it happens.
Differences in expectations of blogger and reader are not 
split only along the lines of friend blogs vs. big blogs. For 
example, on knit blogs, Lillian comments, answers 
questions, and provides positive feedback, but she is 
unwilling to do the same on other blogs she reads, such as a 
science blog that relates to her graduate studies.
Many of these differences—in expectations, in 
commenting, in other regards—can be traced to the reader’s 
perception of the blogger or blog, and to the reader’s 
motivation for reading. Lillian views the knit and craft 
blogs as a community and often attributes certain 
characteristics of the community to its primarily female 
composition. Tony accounts for his commenting practices 
as something he enjoys doing as an engineer. Charles reads 
blogs as a routine that helps him obtain information. Judith 
reads primarily to keep in contact with friends. It is not only 
the way the blogger presents herself or himself that affects 
the readers perception of the blogger, but also the purpose 
for which the reader is reading.
Although this paper focuses on blog readers, only three of 
the fifteen participants do not have their own blog. Despite 
the fact that many of our participants are also bloggers, at 
least nominally, the findings presented here are still 
applicable to blog readers, because, as argued above, there 
is no evidence in the literature that there exist bloggers who 
do not read blogs. However, one difference is the tendency 
for the non-bloggers to read only popular, highly trafficked 
blogs, whereas, of the twelve blog readers with blogs, ten 
used their blogs to keep up with friends. Ultimately, though,
1117
