CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
driving [1]. They also found that subjects felt more in 
control of the vehicle when using gesture interaction.
Perspectives on a Multimodal Interaction Technique
The benefits of low visual demand from gesture interaction 
are somewhat questioned by the identified disadvantages 
and limitations. Nevertheless, reducing visual demand is in 
itself important enough to suggest incorporating gesture 
interaction into vehicles. Our subjects felt that the best way 
to optimize gesture interaction was use it in combination 
with elements from the two other interaction techniques. 
Combining gestures with tactile and passive visual elements 
could create a powerful and diverse interaction platform.
One way to achieve such a platform would be to combine 
gesture interaction with touch interaction. Here you could 
have a touch screen interface, which could receive gestures 
on top of the button-layer interface allowing the user to 
select either input technique for the basic functions and 
resort to traditional interaction when it comes to advanced 
functions. This alternative also offers some potential in 
terms of disabling advanced resource demanding interaction 
when the vehicle is moving perhaps even turning off the 
screen accepting only gesture input. Such a combination of 
interaction technique could be further augmented by 
offering tactile elements, such as a knob-type input device 
like the one found on the car stereo.
According to Wickens [26], an advantage of using multiple 
interfaces and modalities lies in the possibility to prey on 
the concept of minimal attention user interfaces. Pascoe et 
al. stated that minimal attention is achieved through the use 
of modes of interaction that does not interfere with the 
mode that the user is already employing [18]. In this regard, 
an interface could accommodate for inaccessible or 
inopportune perceptual channels by offering multimodality. 
Which modalities should be used at any given time would 
then either be up to the driver to decide or possibly based 
on context or situation. The challenge is to discover how 
the benefits from each interaction technique elements can 
be utilized without bringing with them the disadvantages of 
their original interaction technique.
Limitations
Our experiment suffers from a number of limitations, which 
could form further research with interaction techniques for 
in-vehicle systems. First, the three techniques differed not 
only in terms of their input characteristics, but also in terms 
of output. This was discussed briefly in the previous, but 
the way feedback was provided to the subjects in the three 
systems could certainly have influenced our findings. We 
need further studies to address ways to combine the input 
and the output. Secondly, for practical reasons we had to 
place the touch and gesture interfaces in a slightly different 
position than the tactile interface. Placement of in-vehicle 
systems is definitely important as drivers remove their eyes 
from the road to the system. The lower placement of the 
tactile interface could probably be a disadvantage in terms 
of eye glance durations and perhaps other issues. Thirdly,
the tactile interface provided more functionality than the 
touch and gesture interfaces being an off-the-shelf product. 
It is acknowledged that increased system complexity can 
reduce user efficiency and effectiveness. Thus, the extra 
functionality could potentially influence the findings of the 
tactile sessions in a negative way.
CONCLUSION
Research on in-vehicle systems has illustrated a need for 
new interaction techniques for in-vehicle systems as more 
conventional techniques decrease driving performance. 
Studies on visual workload has shown significant less eyes-
on-the-road time if drivers interact with in-vehicle systems 
with high visual demands and this directly affects driving 
performances. In this paper, we compared three different 
interaction techniques for in-vehicle systems. Our focus 
was to explore their effects on driver performance as well 
as eye glance behaviour. Hence, we aim to follow a “you 
can touch, but you cannot look” mantra.
Our results indicated that gesture interaction can reduce eye 
glances on simple secondary task interaction performances 
especially longer eye fixation glances. However, we found 
no effect of eye glances to the driving errors, i.e. on lateral 
control and longitudinal control. But the gesture interaction 
was not fully attention free as subjects sometimes had to 
make eye/hand coordination. The touch interaction was the 
fastest interaction technique, but also led to the most long 
duration eye glances (above 2 seconds). Finally, we found 
no significant differences on interaction errors.
As our experiment suffers from a number of limitations in 
terms of i.e. the differences on implemented feedback and 
placement of interfaces during the experiment, new studies 
could focus on how the interaction techniques perform with 
similar feedback forms. Furthermore, further studies could 
focus on how we can combine the interaction techniques to 
create powerful and adaptable configurations.
AKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work behind this paper received financial support from 
the Danish Research Agency (grants no. 2106-04-0022 and 
274-07-0157). We thank all the participating test subjects. 
We would also like to thank Bang &amp; Olufsen for the 
collaboration especially Jannie Friis Kristensen. Finally, we 
want to thank several anonymous reviewers for comments 
on drafts of this paper.
REFERENCES
1. Alpern, M. and Minardo, K. (2003). Developing a Car 
Gesture Interface for Use as a Secondary Task in CHI 
2003: New Horizons. Human-Computer Interaction 
Institute (HCII), Carnegie Mellon University.
2. Bach, K. M., Jæger, M. G., Skov, M. B., and
Thomassen, N. G. (2007). A Classification of In-Vehicle 
Systems Research: Understanding, Measuring and 
Evaluating Attention, HCI Lab Technical Report no. 
2007/2
1147
