CHI 2008 Proceedings · Tangibles: Input &amp; Output	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
unit or via turning the volume controller knob seen on the 
left. Thus, the user of the car stereo usually experience 
tactile feedback when pressing buttons or turning knobs. 
The display presents information regarding playing mode, 
track number, and volume level.
Touch Interaction
The touch interaction technique was manifested in a touch 
screen with a touch-to-push interface (see figure 2).
Figure 2. Overview of the touch screen based music player 
manifesting touch interaction. Play/pause is located in the 
middle (1), skip forward/skip back is located on the sides (2), 
and volume control is located to the right (3). The figure shows 
the system in playing mode – if the pause button is touched, 
the icon changes to a “play icon” and the music stops. 
Diagonal size is approximately 7”.
By touching the buttons on the interfaces, the user controls 
the basic functionality of the system. Buttons are triggered 
by button release only, i.e. nothing happens if buttons are 
pressed and held or if buttons are missed. The player 
features only basic functionality of the kind also found on 
the car stereo, i.e. play/pause, skip back/forward, and adjust 
volume up/down. The interface also displays the artist and 
song number for the track currently being played.
Gesture Interaction
The gesture interaction was implemented through a touch 
screen based “drawing canvas” as illustrated in figure 3.
Figure 3. A touch screen serves as the canvas for gesture 
interaction. The hand is drawing a line from left to right 
indicating a skip forward operation.
The user controls the player by using a finger to draw 
gestures anywhere on the canvas. The input is then matched 
against a set of predefined gestures and any command 
assigned to that specific gesture is executed. The system 
features the same basic functionality as the two other
systems, i.e. play/pause, skip back/forward, and adjust 
volume up/down. Track numbers are read out loud is 
included dubbed “Get Song Number”. In addition a set of 
earcons provide auditory feedback, for instance when a 
gesture could not be recognized. Figure 4 presents the 
implemented gestures, which are inspired by Pirhonen et al. 
[19], and their respective function.
1 2
Play / pause
Skip Forward 
Skip Backward 
Volume Up 
Volume Down
Get Song Number
Figure 4. The set of input gestures for the gesture interaction 
based music player. A dot indicates a gesture start, e.g. play or 
pause is executed by tapping the canvas twice.
EXPERIMENT
The main objective for the experiment was to compare the 
three interaction techniques as illustrated above. In this 
section, we outline the rationale behind the experiment and 
illustrate key elements of the experiment.
Subjects
16 people (1 female, M=28, SD=5.7) participated in our 
experiment. All subjects carried valid driver’s licenses and 
their driving experience ranged from app. 100 km per year 
to 20,000 km per year (M=4,732 km, SD=5,966 km). All 
subjects stated that they were in a fair health condition 
including having normal or corrected-to-normal vision. 7 of 
the 8 subjects in the controlled track sessions had been to a 
similar facility while training for their driver’s licenses 
whereas 6 of 8 subjects in the simulated driving sessions 
indicated that they had previously used steering wheel and 
pedals for computer games and had tried the selected game.
Design
We utilized a combined within-subject and between-subject 
design using interface type (tactile, touch, and gesture) as 
within independent variable and driving setting (controlled 
and simulated) as between independent variable. Subjects 
were randomly assigned to exactly one of the two driving 
settings where they each participated in three sessions; one 
for each of the interface types. The order of interface types 
was counter-balanced between subjects to minimize carry-
over effects. Thus, in total we conducted 48 (3x2x8) testing 
sessions (3=interaction techniques, 2=settings, 8=subjects).
1141
