CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
examples of related work). A recent time-based survey [17] 
unfortunately classifies activities into categories that are too 
coarse for making specific recommendations (e.g., “Rest &amp; 
Relaxation,” “Social Life”). We needed data about leisure 
practices, particularly out-of-home activities, which were 
fine-grained enough to make specific activity 
recommendations. So we conducted six types of field 
exercises focusing on the following questions:
•	How do young Japanese spend their leisure time?
•	What resources do they use to support leisure time?
•	What needs exist for additional support that might be
provided by a new kind of media technology?
Interviews and Mockups (IM): Twenty semi-structured 
interviews with 16-33-year-olds and a further 12 interviews 
with 19-25-year-olds examined routines, leisure activities, 
and resources used to support them. We first asked for 
accounts of recent outings and then for feedback on Magitti 
concept scenarios and a mock-up.
Online Survey: We conducted a survey on a market 
research web site to get statistical information on specific 
issues. We received 699 responses from 19-25-year-olds.
Focus Groups: We ran three focus groups of 6-10 
participants each, concentrating on mobile phone use. In 
these we presented a walkthrough of the Magitti mock-up 
and its functions to gather detailed feedback on the concept.
Mobile Phone Diaries (MPD): To get a picture of the daily 
activities of 19-25-year-olds, we conducted two mobile 
phone diary studies, first with 12 people for one Sunday, 
and then with 21 participants for a seven-day week.
Street Activity Sampling (SAS): We conducted 367 short 
interviews with people who appeared to be in our target age 
range and at leisure in about 30 locations in Tokyo and 
surrounding areas at different times and days of the week. 
We asked people to report on three activities from their day, 
choose one as a focal activity, classify it into one of a 
number of pre-determined types and characterize it in terms 
of planning, transportation, companionship, information 
requirements, familiarity with the location, and so on.
Expert Interviews: We interviewed three experts on the 
youth market in the publishing industry to learn about youth 
trends in leisure, and information commonly published to 
inform and support their activities.
Informal observation: Finally, we “hung out” in popular 
Tokyo neighborhoods observing young adults at leisure.
Critical Findings from Field Exercises
The following findings were key to Magitti’s design.
How young people in Tokyo spend their leisure time
In IM interviews, shopping was the most commonly 
reported activity that requires an outing, followed by going 
out with friends, dining out, going on a date, and doing 
sport (some of these objectives could overlap). In SAS 
interviews, dining was the most frequent type (31.8%) of
activity, closely followed by shopping (24.6%), and then by 
browse/explore/look (7.5%). So dining and shopping appear 
to dominate activities that involve going out (cf [34]).
SAS interviewees reported going out on average 2-3 times a 
week. Average commutes to leisure took 20 to 30 minutes, 
but it was not unusual to commute for an hour or more.
What resources are used to support leisure time
In pre-IM questionnaires and the online survey, respondents 
reported using roughly the same top four resources to 
discover and plan leisure time: Friends and family, TV, 
Internet, and Magazines. While online survey respondents 
rated the Internet highest and the IM interviewees rated 
friends and family highest, both groups rated city-guide 
magazines as less important. This suggests that printed 
resources are not holding their ground in the electronic age.
We learned that information based on personal experiences 
of friends and family is trusted the most. “I know that other 
people I know have tried out something before, that it 
becomes like trustworthy information and something that I 
can rely on. ” Because such experiences are not very 
extensive, people also rely on less trustworthy, commercial 
sources such as magazine articles, web sites, and 
advertisements.
At the time of the interviews (2005), the mobile Internet 
was only rarely mentioned as a resource for planning and 
engaging in leisure. A year later, when we polled people on 
the streets, mobile Internet use seemed to have increased, 
with 60% reporting using the mobile web, mainly for train 
schedules (45%) and weather (24%). There were still 
relatively few reported uses of the mobile web for 
restaurant, shops, and movie information (around 5% each).
What needs exist for additional support
When asked, 58.8% of SAS interviewees said they would 
have liked more information to support their focal activity. 
The most common requests were for maps and venue 
locations (14.6%), customers’ and friends’ opinions (8.2%), 
prices (7.8%) and store/venue contents (6.8%).
During IMs and focus groups we learned that young adults 
often go to places they already know or that their friends 
know because they are safe bets. However, they also like to 
explore places they don’t know: “... Me and my friends are 
always looking to find fun places to go to ... Some places 
that will suit our style.” Finding new places is not always 
easy, though, as SAS interviewees were generally 
unfamiliar with the neighborhood they were in, averaging 
just 2.7 on a scale of 1=not at all to 7=extremely well.
When looking for new places, people mentioned concern 
about crowds, since places in Tokyo often become packed 
(especially when it rains), and since people sometimes 
travel long distances, they do not want to be disappointed. 
Requests for information about interiors, ambience, and 
photos reflected the fact that many venues in Tokyo have 
no front window where one can peer in to get a sense of the
1158
