CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
atmosphere. Indeed, in the city center where land is 
expensive, venues are often up or down many floor levels.
Design Requirements
The field work led to several core requirements for Magitti.
Relaxation, Serendipity and Spontaneity: One of two top 
leisure priorities for 19-25-year-olds was “Relaxation” (the 
other being “Companionship”). Young people have busy 
schedules, often with multiple occupations (e.g., student 
and part-time-worker). Our focus groups were attracted to 
the idea of very easy and serendipitous information access, 
even though planning and research do take place around 
leisure.
Avoidance of Information Overload: Related to the 
preceding requirement is the issue of information overload, 
with many publications and advertisements, all attempting 
to persuade. This problem is particularly acute in Tokyo’s 
physical environment. As one respondent said, “it’s almost 
like the information is flowing over and there’s so much 
information that you’re crushed with information.” This 
suggests a design imperative to reduce leisure information 
to only the most relevant.
Minimal size: Mobile phones, or “keitai” (handhelds), are 
fundamental to leisure in Japan. It is essential for many 
facets of life, particularly amongst the younger generations 
to have something as small as possible that can be carried in 
a pocket [16]. This requirement trumps desire for a large 
screen that can display lots of useful information.
One-handed operation: Anyone who has ridden a Tokyo 
train or subway during commute hours will be aware of 
passengers using their keitai, many of them standing up 
holding onto a rail or pole for support. People also often use 
their keitai while walking around with a bag in one hand. 
So it is not surprising that interviewees repeatedly voiced a 
strong requirement for one-handed operation.
In our first iteration, we chose to focus on relaxation, 
serendipity, and spontaneity by generating 
recommendations automatically using activity inferencing. 
But we also recognize that opinions from family and friends 
could be extremely valuable in the recommendation process 
and hope to capture this requirement in future design 
iterations.
Having laid out motivations for Magitti, we now discuss the 
system itself in the context of our own and related research.
Magitti
Magitti anticipates the coming age of augmented reality and 
GeoTagging services that will present city-guide-style 
information to users based on location or by sensing 
physical objects [5, 13]. For example GeoVectorTM 
(geovector.com) provides a service that allows a user to 
point her mobile phone at items in the environment to get 
information about them. However, as more venues and 
services go online in this way, the augmented space will
become as cluttered as the physical environment; Tokyo 
streets bristle with a multitude of garish signs and 
Jumbotrons. One approach to culling such information is 
demonstrated by SocialightTM (socialight.com), a service 
that uses social networks as a means of sharing and filtering 
location-based “sticky-notes,” so the user sees only friends’ 
recommendations, although they can opt to see information 
shared with everyone.
Magitti takes a different approach, which is to use context 
filtering to narrow down the inevitable overload of leisure 
time offerings in dense urban areas. It can do so without the 
user having to explicitly define her profile or preferences. 
The system infers interests and activities from models that 
are learned over time implicitly, based on individual and 
aggregate user behavior, such as places visited, web 
browsing, and communications with friends. Of course, the 
user can also explicitly provide information to improve 
Magitti’s recommendations, but our objective is that this 
should not be necessary to benefit from the system’s ability 
to filter information.
Magitti is a leisure activity guide with three key features:
•	Context Awareness: It knows about current time, 
location, weather, store hours, and user patterns. It also 
lets people specify a future context for planning.
•	Activity Awareness: It filters items to recommend based
on its user’s inferred or explicitly specified activity 
modes. Five modes were derived from observations in 
our field work: Eating, Shopping, Seeing, Doing, or 
Reading. Each item in the Magitti database is explicitly 
tagged as being associated with and therefore a possible 
candidate recommendation for one of these modes.
•	Serendipitous, relaxing experience: Users need not
enter profile, preferences, or queries. They can rely on 
context and activity inferencing for Magitti to continually 
and automatically update recommendations.
RELATED RESEARCH: COMPARATIVE OVERVIEW 
Context aware information retrieval research has been 
underway for well over a decade. An early example of a 
context-aware guide system is the Personal Shopper 
Assistant [4]; an indoor RF infrastructure that 
communicated with a wireless handheld device to provide 
useful context-related information about offerings and their 
locations in a store. The information was location- and 
time-sensitive, and in this way resembled Magitti, but in 
1994 much of the research was focused on infrastructure.
Related Activity-Detection Research
One early system related to Magitti was Lamming and 
Newman’s activity-based information-retrieval system [20], 
which presented information that was generated in contexts 
similar to the user’s current context. Although the intent 
was for activity detection to be a key element in system, the 
technology of the time was not able to infer activity with 
effective accuracy.
1159
