CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Activity detection is an active research topic with many 
promising results. Begole et al. [7] experimented with 
sensor-based availability detection. Various authors used 
sensing to infer human activities from use of objects with 
RFID tags on them [27, 37], from special purpose wearable 
sensing hardware [21, 30], or by using video and audio data 
analysis [25]. Froehlich et al. [10] found correlations 
between place preference and data from sensed locations, 
such as frequency of visits and distance traveled.
In our work we are interested in enabling mobile context 
and activity inferencing with no special infrastructure or 
hardware. Relying only on time and location makes the 
challenge of activity inferencing more daunting, but some 
research in this space exists. Closest to our own activity 
modeling research is that of Liao et al. [22], who use 
location-based sensing with Relational Markov Networks 
and other techniques to infer occurrence of certain 
activities: ‘AtHome’, ‘AtWork’, ‘Shopping’, ‘DiningOut’, 
and ‘Visiting.’ Shopping and DiningOut, two of the activity 
types we are interested in, were the most difficult to classify.
The previously described work relates to the detection of a 
person’s current activity, but the Magitti guide system 
needs to predict a person’s future activities. Begole et al. 
[6] modeled activity on the keyboard and mouse across 
multiple locations to predict a user’s future reachability for 
communication. Ashbrook &amp; Starner [3] and Krumm &amp; 
Horvitz [18] demonstrated the detection and prediction of 
movement to significant locations from traces of GPS data. 
Prior to Magitti, there have been no user applications that 
predict a person’s likelihood of being engaged in different 
types of leisure activity.
Related work on Mobile City Guide Applications
There is one class of location-based information 
recommendation system that is similar in spirit to Magitti: 
location-aware tourist guides. We survey just a few notable 
systems in this section (see [5, 36] for more extensive 
surveys). These systems are similar to Magitti in that they 
recommend venues based on the user’s stated or inferred 
preferences. However, none of the following systems base 
recommendations on prediction of the user’s activities.
Cyberguide [1] was a mobile tourist guide for the Georgia 
Tech campus (inside and out) and adjacent neighborhoods. 
It was aware of its time, location, and history and could 
match information on venues and special events to these 
data. However, it was not a true recommender system.
MobyRec [33] is a context-aware mobile tourist 
recommender system that lets users specify preferences for 
hotels, restaurants, etc. MobyRec improves its 
recommendations over time. However, unlike with Magitti, 
new users always have to specify queries.
GUIDE [9] offers tour routes and accesses ticket 
reservation services and related capabilities based on user- 
stated interests and queries. In its tours, GUIDE takes into 
account the hours and busy times of requested attractions
and the most scenic routes between them, and dynamically 
recomputes routes based on location and time. GUIDE is 
targeted for touring unfamiliar areas, whereas Magitti is 
optimized for city residents who are looking for new places 
to enjoy leisure activities. GUIDE is also not geared 
towards a serendipitous experience as it does not predict 
user interests; users must issue queries or create a tour for 
themselves.
COMPASS [38] is a tourist guide service covering a wide 
range of venue types. It uses profile and goal information 
entered by its user to constrain recommendations of venues. 
It takes account of location, speed, user profile, schedule, 
shopping list, and recency of previous visit. Non-user 
specific elements of context are also considered, such as 
weather and traffic conditions. Like Magitti, it allows the 
user to view items on a map interface, but COMPASS 
filters them by the user’s stated goal and preferences, rather 
than activity type. And again, COMPASS relies on a user to 
enter her initial interests.
CRUMPET [28] provides tips, tour suggestions, maps and 
other information on a range of tourist-related venues 
(restaurants, movies, shows, etc.). It aims to learn user 
preferences over time, but not to predict future activity.
MAGITTI SYSTEM DESIGN
We now present the Magitti system in more detail.
User Interface
Magitti’s Main Screen (Figure 1, left) shows a scrollable 
list of up to 20 recommended items that match the user’s 
current situation and profile. As the user walks around, the 
list updates automatically to show items relevant to new 
locations. Each recommendation is presented in summary 
form on the Main Screen, but users can tap each one to 
view its Detail Screen (Figure 1, right). This screen shows 
the initial texts of a description, a formal review, and user 
comments, and the user can view the full text of each 
component on separate screens. The Detail Screen also 
allows the user to rate the item on a 5-star scale.
Figure 1. Magitti’s Main Screen (left) and Detail Screen 
(right).
1160
