CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Operator A: Yeah the video’s working fine and audio
Operator H: Okay so can we go on the next ride 
yeah?
Operator A: Having having said that video has just 
closed but I think once you oh it’s back again... I 
think once you go on the ride it’ll be okay
Operator H: Okay
Operator J: I think there’s somebody somebody 
standing in front of her so probably she’s blocking the 
transmission
This sequence exhibits the counterpart perspective to 
operator H’s work in the previous vignette. Here we see the 
extensive work of the crew upstairs in getting the ECG, 
accelerometer and audiovisual streams functioning to such 
a degree that they are in a ‘rideable’ state. This includes 
reasoning about the causes of wireless drop outs.
Now that the system is in a readied state and the last ride 
has come to a stop, the rider and her co-rider are taken by 
Operator H to the front of the queue, where they walk onto 
the Booster platform together. Like Sam, operator H helps 
the rider into the seat and checks the equipment for trailing 
wires and so on. With the bottom carriage loaded, the ride 
operator spins the ride halfway round so that our rider and 
her colleague are waiting at the top while the next carriage 
is loaded. It is at this point that the rider attempts to contact 
the ground. In fact, her audio is not generally audible but is 
channelled into some headphones which operator S has in 
his hands. However, she probably does not know this.
{18} Rider: Scuse me can you hear me? 
Operator S She’s saying can we hear her
Operator A [to Operator H]: She’s saying can we hear 
her... wave to her or something
Rider: Scuse me
{19} Operator H: Yeah I don’t [inaudible] forward. She 
sounded quite scared
Rider: Are you sure Ned? [Ned is sitting next to her]
Operator A: [laughs] Excellent that’s what we want to 
hear
Rider: Hello control?
Operator S: She thinks we can hear us 
Rider: Control please
{20}Operator A: Her heart rate’s gone down 
a bit now
Rider: Okay... control room can we please turn it off 
for Ned?
Operator A: I can’t quite see her eyes... but 
Rider: He’s really scared
Operator S: She said she’s really scared 
Rider: Please can you get the ride off?
Operator S: She said she’s really scared can we take 
her down
Operator A [to Operator H]: Apparently apparently 
the [inaudible] on the top says she’s really scared can 
we take her down
Operator H: Sorry? 
{21} Operator S: I think we should I think we should 
pretend we haven’t heard
Operator H: Sorry could you repeat
Operator T: Do you think it seriously or?
Operator A [to Operator H]: Apparently the girl on the 
top is really scared can we take her down
Rider: There’s nothing to be scared... hey
Operator A: How how how scared do you think she 
is... she’s not looking too...
Operator H: She really is saying that she wants 
down?
Rider: Hello control can you please hear me? 
[Operator A looks at Operator S, who has the 
headphones to one ear during this]
Operator S: S’yee yeah [takes headphones away from 
ear] she keeps saying ... can she come down
Rider: Hello pleeease
Operator A: She does keep saying that I mean we 
might [inaudible] actually so maybe bring her down if 
you can
Rider: Hellooo
As the ride actually begins properly, what is a critical 
moment for the technical crew arrives.
{22}Rider: Ned Ned close your eyes
Operator A: Yeah... How how’s she looking is she still 
Rider: Stop... stop please stop please stop noo 
Operator A [to Operator H]: She she keeps shouting
out stop... go go and see the ride operators 
[inaudible]
{23} Operator T: Why, it’s way to 160 her heart
At this point, operator H can be seen moving towards the 
booth in order to instruct the ride operator to slow or stop 
the ride. The main job of work for the crew in this episode, 
both on-the-ground and in the control area, is in 
determining the ‘seriousness’ of the situation, and then 
acting appropriately. Experiencing fear is a presumed 
possibility (if not expectation) with a ride like the Booster, 
and the technical crew must be sensitive to ‘normal’ or 
‘expected’ levels of fear versus ‘serious’ fear. As the 
situation progresses, a variety of methods come into play in 
determining the seriousness of the unfolding situation: 
Operator H observes: “she sounded quite scared&apos;; operator 
A considers her heart rate and facial expression (“how’s she 
looking&apos;); operator T explicitly introduces the issue of 
seriousness (“do you think it seriously or?&apos;); and finally 
operator S reflects on her persistence (“she keeps saying&apos;, 
“she keeps shouting out stop&apos;).
At this point we must stress a couple of points. Firstly, the 
rider’s companion reported being scared rather than the 
rider herself, and neither person was in any physical danger 
given that such rides are subject to strict safety checks and 
agreed operation procedures. Secondly, the operators in the 
control area were not in direct control of, nor directly 
responsible for, the ride’s operation, and this is a point upon 
which operator work in determining seriousness revolves. 
Initially the rider’s communication attempts are woven into
1172
