CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
“I think in a way it made me feel more comfortable ... to be 
speaking to somebody all the time ... you have somebody 
accompany you rather than feeling the dread alone”.
It is interesting that they felt this way even though the 
communication was asymmetric, i.e., there was no 
reassuring direct feedback from the audience.
However, the most striking aspect of these performances 
was their bi-modal nature. Nearly everyone, including the 
seasoned professional, switched between providing a lucid 
commentary when the ride was moving slowly {4, 16} to 
displaying a distinct loss of control, shouting and screaming 
but being unable to commentate, at high intensity moments 
{6,16}). Interviewees commented on this:
“There were certain periods were I just couldn’t concentrate 
on anything else other than the ride, put it that way”.
Riders also reported losing their awareness of being 
recorded and observed during these intense moments:
“Maybe at the beginning I was controlling myself ... later on, 
everything was gone ... during the ride it all just faded away”.
This reflects previous accounts of how ‘pleasurable’ 
experiences can lead to a ‘flow state’ in which people 
experience an altered awareness of their surroundings [4].
An interesting design implication of this bi-modal structure 
is a potential requirement to create ride-programs (human 
or computer controlled) that provide opportunities for both 
modes. While most rides tend to begin slowly and then 
speed up, it may be beneficial to exaggerate this or even 
build slower moments into the middle of rides to offer 
opportunities for more lucid commentary. Interestingly, our 
wireless communications also seem to have been more 
reliable at slower speeds, with most drop outs occurring 
during fast movements {6}, and so the technology may also 
benefit from carefully designed programs, for example, if 
we wish to avoid long drop outs in the telemetry.
The process of donning the technology also affected the 
rider’s experience. We saw in sequences {9,10,11} that it 
took many minutes to don the system dealing with mundane 
but important details such as glasses, ponytails, the fit of the 
helmet and trailing wires. Such delays could heighten 
anticipation and anxiety as seen in {15}. Fitting the body 
worn sensors can also be invasive {9}, involving 
consideration of privacy and the gender of helpers. A 
further delay arose from the need to coordinate performers 
and audience, especially delaying the ride until the audience 
was in place, primed and warmed up for them {3,14}. 
Managing the coordination of performers and audience will 
be a significant challenge if telemetry systems are to be 
employed on a mass scale in high throughput situations 
such as theme parks. New mechanisms (e.g., involving 
mobile phones) may be required to coordinate individual 
riders with groups of family and friends who wish to 
observe them in particular. Of course, current rides already 
involve a degree of coordination between these two roles as 
family and friends may try to spot ‘their riders’ from a
viewing gallery. However, the introduction of our telemetry 
system raises the stakes if the point is for spectators to be 
able to observe particular riders.
From operator to orchestrator. F:TL also significantly 
extended the ride operator role to include a variety of 
additional tasks concerned with the deployment of the 
telemetry system such as fitting, testing and monitoring as 
well as the coordination of ride start, speed and acceleration 
with the rest of the event. Our data has also demonstrated 
that in an actual fairground setting, ride operation might 
additionally involve provision of the ‘professional rider’ 
and the interpretation of the telemetry data {2}. In F:TL 
these various orchestration functions of ride operation were 
spread across multiple people and spaces, requiring new 
communication and coordination practices and technologies 
{17} and resulting in a complex control scenario.
Overall, our telemetry system not only transforms each role, 
but also serves to connect them in new ways. Perhaps the 
most interesting perturbation introduced by our system was 
to more directly connect riders to the orchestration team, as 
shown in our third vignette in which a rider uses the 
telemetry system to try to persuade the team to stop the ride 
on behalf of another rider. This vignette also shows how the 
team use the telemetry system as a resource to help them 
decide how to proceed, drawing on audio, video and even 
the heart rate data in assessing the state of play {19,20,23}. 
It is interesting to reflect on this in light of the history of 
amusement rides. Traditional fairground rides were (and 
still are) on a much smaller physical scale than today’s 
extreme rides and so naturally afforded a close connection 
between riders, spectators and operators. For example, so- 
called ‘gaff lads’ (operators assistants) would ride the 
Waltzers, collecting money from ‘punters’ in the cars, 
showing off to the girls and giving some cars an extra spin 
depending on who was in them (see [11] for an account of 
showmanship and traditional fairgrounds). Modern theme 
park rides however have fractured this relationship due to 
their massive scale and also computer control. Perhaps 
telemetry systems such as ours can reconnect these 
fragmented roles and spaces, restoring an element of 
traditional showmanship? Indeed, one of our interviewees, 
an experienced showman, expressed an appreciation for the 
technology as being “back to the old school” in this regard.
Selective disconnection
This said, providing a universal open channel between 
performers, spectators and orchestrators may be going too 
far. Returning to the bi-modal nature of performance on an 
extreme ride such as the Booster, on watching their videos 
afterwards several interviewees were surprised by their loss 
of control during intense moments and noted some potential 
for embarrassment, for example:
“I was kind of slightly um worried that I would have done 
something stupid”
1174
