CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
understanding of how this technology is understood by the 
public. As a first prototype we staged a sequence of live 
experiments which played a principal role in a series of 
major science museum events based around the study of 
amusement rides. We therefore begin by describing this 
performance event and our telemetry system before turning 
to our study.
OVERVIEW OF FAIRGROUND: THRILL LABORATORY 
Our study is of an event called Fairground: Thrill Laboratory, 
henceforth referred to as F:TL. This was a series of six 
theatrical events that were staged at the Dana Centre (Science 
Museum, London) in three weeks of autumn 2006. Full 
technical details of the design of the events and technology 
can be found in [17], as these are only briefly summarised in 
this paper. The events were designed to explore the nature of 
thrill through a combination of science and entertainment, 
involving talks by experts (for example, in biometrics and 
theme park ride engineering), live telemetry streamed from a 
selection of theme park rides, and the opportunity to go on 
the ride at the end of the evening. After a set of introductory 
talks, the audience was presented with a visualisation of live 
telemetry streamed directly from the ride. Firstly a member 
of the production team rode, providing a live commentary of 
his experience. Secondly, a lottery was used to select an 
audience member whose telemetry would be transmitted 
next. During the final stage of F:TL, all other audience 
members were free to ride, with volunteers using the 
telemetry equipment as often as the technical and 
organisational infrastructure could support.
rotating arm can be controlled, with riders experiencing 
accelerations reaching up to 4G. We have chosen this ride 
because the event structure and technology were at their most 
stable and well developed at this point.
A custom-built wearable telemetry system captured four 
sources of data from riders: video of their face, audio as a 
means of self-reporting, ECG and acceleration. This 
equipment was integrated into a jacket as shown in Figure 3. 
This had to meet several design challenges, including fitting 
the passenger restraint system of each of the rides, being 
comfortable to wear and remaining easily serviceable. The 
design also had to address the physical strain of wearing 
head-mounted equipment at high G-forces.
Figure 3 Wearable telemetry technology
The audience experience of the telemetry data was supported 
by the ‘expert’ visualisation, shown in Figure 4, projected in 
the main auditorium. Other, less detailed visualisations were 
projected into the bar and onto the side of an opposing 
building as ambient display for the benefit of any participants 
who were in a position to observe these locations.
Microphone
Aerials
Jacket
Camera
ECG 
Acceleration 
Heart rate
Live video
Figure 1 Booster Figure 2 Rider position
Each week featured a different amusement ride that was set 
up outside so that it was visible from the various spaces used 
within the venue. Here we draw on the experience 
surrounding the last and most extreme of the three, the 
Booster, a pure white-knuckle ride that relies mainly upon 
fear and on extreme accelerations to elicit a sense of thrill in 
the rider. It features a central tower supporting a 40m-long 
rotating arm, similar to a windmill. Freely rotating carriages 
are attached at either end of the arm and hold two pairs of 
riders seated back-to-back. The speed and direction of the
Figure 4 Visualisation of telemetry data
This visualisation included the ECG and heart rate trails, 
numerical heart rate data, a 3D visualisation of the G forces 
experienced by the rider and live video from the helmet 
camera in addition to the audio stream broadcast over
1168
