CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
particular cache, trip planning, making and publishing a 
cache etc. For each episode, they were asked to record the 
nature of the activity, when and where the behaviour took 
place, and any artefacts involved. Where practical we also 
asked participants to take photos of the episode location to 
provide further context for understanding the behaviour.
Interviews were carried out with participants both before 
and after the 3 week period. A preliminary interview before 
the trial period introduced participants to the study and 
established background context about the participants (age, 
lifestyle, work life, family life and level of geocaching 
experience). The primary interview was conducted as soon 
as possible after the diary period and was based around the 
recorded events. This interview lasted between 60 and 90 
minutes. During this interview, participants provided more 
detailed descriptions of each episode, the context 
surrounding them and any underlying motivations.
FINDINGS
In this section we start with a brief overview of participation 
behaviour among participants before turning our attention to 
some of the underlying social values and motivations that 
shape behaviour. There was a huge range among the 
participants in terms of how often they went on a 
geocaching trip. For the casual cachers, it was something 
they would do every few months, typically during school 
holiday times. For the more keen geocachers, it was 
something that would go on a trip most weekends and in the 
evenings where possible. But they would also interleave 
geocaching with other aspects of their lives, 
opportunistically fitting it in where they could. That is, 
there were times when geocaching was not the primary 
reason for being in a place but that it was sometimes slotted 
in opportunistically around other activities. A good example 
here is of a cacher who was visiting a friend to watch a 
soccer match. He and his partner drove over to the friend’s 
house and parked the car outside the friend’s house. Instead 
of going in the house he left his partner in the car and 
nipped across the road to a park where he knew a cache was. 
He spent 10 minutes looking for the cache and then returned 
to the car to get his partner before going in the house.
“We were going round to a friends house to watch the England 
Israel game and there happens to be one in the Park next to his 
house – so we parked up the car – I leapt out and ran across to the 
park to see if I could find it. ”
Int: “What did the friend think?”
“I don’t think he was aware of it – they would find it a little 
peculiar... The main thought going through my head was that I was 
going to miss kick off and that my wife was in the car waiting for 
me – I said if we had time I would pop in on the way – I think she 
thinks it was one of my sad hobbies – she doesn’t get particularly 
enthused about it... It was probably a 10 minute round trip from 
leaving the car to getting back to the car. ”
A number of participants would try and get out during lunch 
breaks at work to find local caches. Others would combine 
it with journeys, stopping off on the way to somewhere else 
in order to find a cache. The more experienced and 
enthusiastic cachers were also reactive in their behaviour 
responding, for example, to the publication of new caches.
But there were additional touch points to the activity that 
allowed participants to maintain participation through on-
line engagement with the web site and through new cache 
creation and research. For the inexperienced cachers, much 
of this “in between” behaviour was based around finding of 
a particular cache to do or to log a find and so was relatively 
infrequent. However for more enthusiastic cachers, these 
in-between participation points provided an ongoing 
nurturing of their interest. This monitoring activity 
happened daily or every few days through routine visits to 
the geocaching.com web site and through regular email 
alerts. Through the web site and its tracking facilities, these 
cachers monitored the arrival of new caches and new log 
entries for their own caches and built up an awareness of the 
cache landscape in their local area, around their home, their 
work, or other places where they visited on a regular basis.
“I just do half an hour to quickly go through – just to see what is 
happening locally – any new ones I put into my Garmin so that 
they are all on there – so that if we happen to come here I can look 
at it to see what is local to here – I wouldn’t necessarily come from 
Shirehampton to here just to find that one across the road – it’s 
been there some time and it’s not that important to me but because 
we are here why not do it. ”
“I am conscious of where they all are in Cheltenham. So if ever I 
am passing them I will probably have a nose around”
This monitoring behaviour is important in enabling their 
more opportunistic geocaching, and, as we shall see later the 
basis for some of the motivations based around collecting 
and friendly rivalry among fellow cachers.
Motivations for Caching
Social Walking
One of the primary motivations for doing a geocache was 
because it created an opportunity to get out and walk. In 
this respect it is important to think about the activity not 
simply as a destination or a find. Rather, an integral part of 
the experience is the getting there. An important question 
then is why people simply didn’t just go on a walk. What is 
significant is how caching was used by people to give a 
walk a sense of purpose. This sense of purpose helped 
motivate participants to walk and engage in physical activity 
and without which they would be less inclined to go.
“Helen and I aren’t keen walkers. It’s the only way to get us out is 
to put a geocache at the end. It’s a good way of getting people 
who don’t like to walk much to get out and do a walk.”
“I doubt I would stop at the bottom of the hill and think – oh I’ll go 
for a walk up there. It’s not likely but when you think there is a 
cache up there I would do it. My incentive is that cache at the top 
of the hill.”
This lack of motivation to walk was particularly notable 
among children. Several parents commented how they 
wanted to get their children out of their rooms and away 
from the computer but that it was difficult to do this simply 
by suggesting going for a walk for no purpose. Indeed such 
suggestions by parents would often be met with moans from 
the children and a rather reluctant inclination to the walk. 
Caching provided a reason that walking in itself did not.
“It’s another goal though – if I am taking the children on another 
dog walk they will be complaining about the fact that they have to
1179
