CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Christmas doing anagrams trying to work out these damns things – 
so you can get people to help you. ”
While these challenges are in some sense about personal 
achievement it is important to consider social elements 
underlying them in terms of opportunities for social action 
but also in terms of reputation among the community. As 
we see from the quote above, solving these puzzles was at 
times a collective effort in which participants solved them 
with friends, family or work colleagues.
The final stage of the cache search too became an 
opportunity for social occasioning. We discussed aspects of 
this in relation to children performing the final search when 
caching with their parents. Rather than efficiency concerns 
here, parents used the search to set a challenge for their 
children. These search opportunities were also appropriated 
by cachers for a form of localised play, introducing a 
competition among the local group for who will find it first.
The other aspect of problem solving and challenge where 
there was an underlying social element concerns reputation 
among the broader community. Participants were driven to 
choose particular puzzles or caches that were hard because 
this gave them credibility among the community
“I like the ones that are hard to find because there is a bit more of 
a reputation to be gained from doing a hard one. ”
There was great satisfaction to be had by participants 
finding a cache for which previous cachers had reported a 
succession of “Did Not Finds”. This starts to explain why, 
as was discussed above, many cachers did not like to give 
up their search. The reporting of a “Did Not Find” within 
the social context of the community was a public admission 
of defeat. In this respect the on-line activity with its social 
underpinning was intimately bound up with behaviours that 
take place in situ at the cache site itself.
Travel Bugs and Coins
In this section we discuss key artefacts within geocaching, 
namely “travel bugs” and “geo-coins” (collectively known 
as “travellers”) and the behaviours and social motivations 
that occur with and through them. These are physical 
artefacts with unique IDs, which get moved from cache to 
cache by participants who log them in and out of caches 
using the geocaching website. The very simplicity of the 
idea of moving from cache to cache allowed them to be 
appropriated for a variety of creative purposes. Participants 
created “missions” for these travellers such as “travel as far 
north as possible”, “travel to as many countries as possible”, 
“get to Sydney Opera House as quickly as possible.” 
Participants also attached small objects of significance (e.g. 
fluffy toys etc) and these become incorporated into the 
missions.
“We have also released our own bug. Alex gave it the mission of 
getting to Sydney opera house which is did in 10 days. Quite 
amazing isn’t it. Picture of the family who took it there with it and 
now it’s stuck slightly north of Sydney.”
There are a number of important issues to draw out here. 
First is that these missions invited a collective participation. 
By putting a traveller out there, participants invite others to 
contribute to the mission. Collective responsibility and trust
are important here. By picking up a traveller a participant 
accepted responsibility to help. This created an expectation 
to move the traveller on. This was significant because there 
was a moral obligation and social pressure to move it on 
creating a sense of urgency to go and do another cache. 
This contributed to a cycle of continued participation.
“Sometimes you feel a bit pressurised because once you have got 
one you have to move and put it somewhere and hopefully 
whatever its target is and if you haven’t been out for a couple of 
weeks and you are holding onto it and someone is expecting you to 
move it on you think well we had better go out. ”
Creating missions was also an opportunity for social 
engagement and play among the immediate social groups 
such as family and caching friends. Several participants 
described how they designed travel bug missions to create 
competitions between themselves.
“Ah well I was having a race with my mates TB – he started his in 
Birmingham and I started mine in Bristol and the idea was that the 
first to get to each others caches – so we raced mine from Bristol 
to Birmingham and his from Birmingham to Bristol- they both went 
at the same time. Mine ended up somewhere bizarre and then down 
to Cornwall to a cache that was so difficult to do people only did it 
once every 6 months so mine spent 6 months down in Cornwall in a 
cache that I actually went down to find so that I could bring it back 
and start it again – but I actually couldn’t find it so it was a 
pointless trip for me and eventually mine made its way to 
Birmingham.”
Again what is significant about this behaviour is the way 
that playful appropriation of the artefacts became a basis for 
a greater participation frequency. The competitive spirit 
created encouraged specific trips to engage in this location- 
based activity so as to beat his friend.
People also created dependencies between different 
travellers which again became another way of creating urges 
to go out and cache. In one example, one geocacher had 
released four travel coins in different caches around the 
South West region of the UK. The aim of the mission 
attached to the coins was to combine all 4 coins together to 
get the location clue and to take a photo of them all together.
“That is another thing that might inspire us to go out – the goal is 
to take a photo of these things together – we had one and then went 
to look at its goal – that’s when we found that you had to get the 
other half of it and take a photograph. So we put it on our watch 
list so that if it got put anywhere and lo and behold it got put up at 
Weston house which is about 10 miles – and we’d been out caching 
all day and we’d had an awful day. It was Jan 1 st or something – 
not great weather. So we got back here and saw the email and it 
was about 9 o’clock and off we went to find it in the dark with 
security lights and everything.”
Of note in this quote is the on-line tracking behaviour that 
occurred around these artefacts. Participants would go to 
the geocaching web site to see where particular coins were 
and which caches they were logged into. When the coins 
were in a convenient cache they would go out to collect it. 
Again this shows the important relationship between the on-
line behaviours and the location specific aspects of the 
activity.
Such tracking of “travellers” was also of significance to
1183
