CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
go on a dog walk. It’s nice to get them out and stretch their legs. 
They like walking but if you are trying to get them out of their 
darkened bedroom where they have got World of Warcraft to play 
on – so in order to entice them out is was just another thing – 
another aim of the trip – not just to go for a blind walk but to 
actually go and find a geocache – so. ” SA
Getting the kids out was a real practical concern for parents 
and the motivations for getting them to participate were 
varied. Parents were keen for their children to get out and 
experience nature, engage in some form of exercise and 
even to explicitly provide the children with alternative 
options to activities based purely on consumption. For 
another parent, geocaching with the children was a way for 
her to engage in an activity which helped her lose weight 
looking after the children. For others, it was a way simply 
to spend time with the children. More broadly, while 
geocaching at times was an isolated activity, in the main 
participants regarded it as a way to spend time with partners, 
family and friends.
In light of this mixture of motivations there are several 
notable characteristics of the activity and technology use. 
First is the level of immersion demanded by the technology. 
Relative to some location-based experiences, the use of the 
GPS devices here is actually relatively backgrounded. That 
is, the GPS is only referred to by people when necessary for 
navigation purposes. It is also notable from the perspective 
of allowing nature to be enjoyed rather than dominated by 
an overly immersive experience. It does not demand the 
continuous attention of individuals enabling ongoing social 
interaction of the group (in contrast to more immersive 
location-based experiences such as audio tours can do). As 
a consequence, the technology and activity design here 
enable the ongoing social interaction among the group that 
is such an important factor in the enjoyment of the activity. 
It also means that a single device is easily shared among a 
group.
An additional aspect of supporting this social behaviour was 
the differentiated level of participation afforded by the 
activity. That is, different members of a social group could 
contribute to different degrees yet still be part of the social 
occasion, making the activity very flexible in terms of 
participation and social inclusivity. For example, one 
participant described how the family would go out 
geocaching. His wife was not particularly bothered about 
geocaching per se but she enjoyed the fact that they would 
be going out for a walk as a family. Her involvement then 
was relatively peripheral except she would occasionally get 
involved if there were any puzzles to do in order to find the 
coordinates. Likewise, participants talked how they would 
go out geocaching with friends who were not into 
geocaching but they would come along to “hang out”. Other 
aspects of this differentiated participation were apparent 
with children where parents would make an effort to 
explicitly involve them, typically letting the children do the 
final part of the search once they were in the vicinity of the 
cache.
“Usually when you get to a place you let one of the kids find the 
box, open it, look through it, find the coins and write in the log 
[book].”
Discovering and Exploring Places
A key motivation underlying participation was its use as a 
way of discovering new places to go. In this respect, it was 
not so much the finding of a cache that was primary but 
where it led to as a consequence of doing this treasure hunt.
“And also the opportunity to go to new places – ’cause they are 
generally in places of quite natural beauty and interest. Things 
that you would normally pass by. There are so many places I have 
driven by and never stopped and then you stop and you still can’t 
see anything until you go hunting for the cache and you realise 
there is a fantastic little haven of natural beauty somewhere – so 
we’ve found loads of really great places... That’s the reason I do it 
– new places – because we go out with the dog we are always 
looking for new places to go. The same place gets boring.”
What is significant here is that caches are not placed in 
random hiding places but rather are located in places of 
natural beauty or significance. By virtue of looking for these 
caches, participants discovered these interesting or beautiful 
places that otherwise they simply would not know about. 
Geocaching as an activity then was being used by people as 
a form of social recommendation about places – a way to 
explore and discover. For some, this discovery was a 
passive process in the sense that participants find new places 
by virtue of doing geocaching. But we also saw how some 
participants were more active in their use of the activity in 
the discovery and exploration of a place. For example, one 
participant who travelled regularly with work used caching 
to find out about the area he was staying rather than just 
remaining in a hotel. Others used it on holiday to help find 
places that were perhaps more off the beaten track and 
dependent on the local knowledge of the person placing the 
cache. But it was more than just a social recommendation. 
There were times too when the caching provided people 
with a structure to their exploration. For example, with 
certain caches participants were directed to look at particular 
features in the environment for clues in order to find the 
final GPS coordinates for a cache. This encouraged them to 
look at places in different ways than if they were not 
caching.
This discovery process also applied to the local area where 
people live where one might expect them to have good local 
knowledge. But such local knowledge is often built upon 
particular routines of their everyday life. In this sense there 
are the same places that you go to regularly out of habit and 
out of function. Geocaching helped people break out of a 
routine way of experiencing their local environment to 
discover places they never knew existed.
“That is the main thing we have found in Reading – we’ve lived in 
Reading for about 4 years now but every time we find a new wood 
or a new park – I never knew this park and lakes existed up by 
Woodley – and its actually a lovely place to go for a picnic or to 
the lake or whatever – I didn’t know what was up there.” PD
In addition, one participant commented how he had stopped 
thinking about his local area as a beautiful place to live – to 
him it was functional and his experience was shaped by his
1180
