CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
those who actually released the travel bugs in the first place. 
Several participants spoke of their simple fascination with 
the physical movement of these artefacts around the world, 
how far they go and just how quickly they get moved 
around by the collective action of the other geocachers. “I 
find that interesting to see how they travel. I am surprised 
some of these things move so far.”
While the experience of this location tracking is performed 
in the on-line world, what is important here is the physical 
movement of the object around the world by other people. 
While it is easy to imagine the implementation of a virtual 
equivalent, this would not have the same meaning as the 
tracking of the physical movement of an artefact.
Making a cache
Unlike many other location-based activities, participation in 
geocaching was not simply about the consumption of 
experiences designed by others. An equally significant way 
in which participants engaged with this activity was in the 
creation and publication of their own geocaches for others to 
consume. This side of the geocaching experience is 
relatively under explored compared with the consumption 
experiences. However, our research indicates that for many 
participants, the creation of these caches was an integral part 
of their experience of geocaching. Making a cache was not 
something people did straight away when entering the 
hobby but typically took place after being involved for a 
period of time. Through doing caches of others, participants 
built up experience of what makes a good or interesting 
cache and acquired the confidence to create and publish 
their own. Making a cache was also more effortful than 
simply doing one and so required more commitment to the 
hobby. Only once participants established they wanted a 
longer term commitment to the activity did they begin to 
engage in creating of their own caches.
The motivations for creation were varied. One of the key 
reasons cited by participants was the desire to give 
something back to the community and hobby that had given 
them pleasure. In this sense it was an act of reciprocation, a 
social act that ensured a continued growth of the cache 
corpus by and for the community. The community therefore 
is very much self sustaining in a way that can be contrasted 
with those communities dependent on third party content 
such as certain other gaming communities.
A second motivation for creating a cache was the desire to 
share with others a place of significance or natural beauty 
(mirroring the earlier motivation for doing caches to find out 
about new places).
“There is one over in Wales by the side of a reservoir – the scenery 
is stunning - on a sunny day lake like today the scenery is so 
beautiful that people ought to know about this so I set this cache up 
over there. This reservoir is so beautiful that I thought well I’ve 
got to take people there.
There was great satisfaction to be had in the knowledge of 
helping others find these places that people would otherwise 
not know about. Reading logs of visitors expressing their 
appreciation was an important part of this experience since it 
makes visible the effects on others that the cache had.
“So Carolyn did quite a bit of research to see where she wanted to 
put it... She got a lot of compliments for that part of the cache. It’s 
gratifying to know you have helped others. Like you’ve 
experienced someone else’s cache has taken you to parts of the 
country that is nice. To then experience that someone else has had 
the same pleasant experience but doing one of your caches that’s 
nice.”
Of significance here is more than just the ability to inform 
others of the place. One could present this information in 
another forum such as, for example, a personal web site. 
But what making and publishing a cache did was provide 
creators with a socially meaningful and accountable way of 
“tagging” a place as being one of interest. When publishing 
a cache on the geocache.com web site, the cache web page 
includes contextual information about the cache. This 
provided an opportunity for cache creators to inform others. 
Some of this was used simply to provide historical or 
geographical context about the place but it also created an 
opportunity for the creators to express some more personal 
information about the place of personal significance to them. 
For example, “this is the place we first met”, or “the bench 
you see is where we used to sit when we were courting”. In 
another example, a participant used this as an opportunity to 
dedicate a cache to his partner and her achievements in 
relation to the place where he had placed the cache.
“I felt proud of Pauline for walking up the hill because it was steep 
and I called it Pauline’s Peak. My partner Pauline suffers from a 
leg condition which means she has to walk with the aid of a stick. 
This is the highest hill she has ever walked up and therefore I have 
named this cache after her splendid achievement!”
Another motivation for making a cache was that it provided 
a mental challenge to the creator. Creating traditional 
caches was relatively straightforward, but the challenge of 
creating puzzle caches was particularly stimulating for the 
creators.
“I suppose also the mental challenge of creating it. I enjoy 
thinking up a new idea.”
Participants would spend a considerable amount of effort in 
creating these puzzles. Thinking up a new angle on a theme 
was important. But there was also effort in identifying a 
location that was both suitable as a hiding place, an 
interesting final destination, had features in the environment 
for use within the puzzle and also a specific location which 
had location coordinates that would work well within the 
framework of the puzzle idea they had set up. This puzzle 
construction would take place over the course of weeks or 
months and involved iterative in situ visits, research work at 
home and the creation of any necessary support materials. 
For some participants, this process was an ongoing activity, 
either through keeping a mental note of seed ideas and 
locations as they came across them or more formally 
keeping a notebook of ideas and relevant content for the 
construction of these puzzle caches
But the motivations here too were partly social in that much 
of it is about setting a mental challenge to others. The effort 
and mental challenge of creating the cache only made sense 
in the context of other people’s efforts to do it.
“It was a strange sensation - you have this split thing within you 
when you set a difficult one – half of you wants someone to find it
1184
