CHI 2008 Proceedings · On the Move	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
to prove its doable and half of you doesn’t want somebody to find it 
–you want logs to come in saying this is an absolute so and so – 
what are those Winscombe Wanderers like? But you want a bit of 
both really.”
As we can see from the above quote, it was important that 
the puzzles are demonstrably doable by others as well as 
being challenging to others – this demonstration was only 
realised through the efforts of other cachers trying to solve 
the puzzle. Much of the feedback about this was played out 
in the logs and it was these responses by the community that 
generated pleasure (and on occasions disappointment – “It 
was a disappointment that they found it so quickly”) for the 
creator and played such an important role in motivating the 
creation of these caches.
“I try to think up new angles all the time – only so that people will 
go wow that was a good idea and you will go yes that’s cool – 
that’s probably why I put my own caches out. ”
“For a while Pam was doing just “Found it thanks” [a typical 
short response in the logs] – very short logs when she first found it. 
But now that she has set some of the own she is realising what 
pleasure you get from seeing other people’s logs... ‘Found it 
Thanks for the Cache’ is pretty boring – that’s not what the person 
who set it is looking for – they are looking for ‘Cor we suffered 
with this and we fell in the stream and here is a picture of us 
getting wet – it makes people seem real then.’
This social context within which these caches were put also 
led to another important consideration for cache creators, 
namely that of reputation. Several participants spoke of the 
importance of reputation and how you get known for the 
style and quality of the caches you create. Participation 
through creation of caches, (as in consuming the treasure 
hunts themselves), is an ongoing thing. The rewards and 
motivations are shaped through this social participation over 
time and is a concern that influenced the efforts people 
continued to put into creation (and ongoing maintenance) of 
their caches. There was always social accountability 
associated with creating and publishing these things.
As well as the motivators which drive creation behaviour 
there were also factors (over and above the creation effort) 
that limited it such that the number of caches created was 
typically orders of magnitude less then the number caches 
consumed by an individual. One such factor was the concern 
for ongoing maintenance of the cache. The practicalities of 
maintenance of different caches effectively created an upper 
limit on how many caches a person is prepared to create. 
But it also impacted on the positions where people put them. 
There was a need for relative convenience to ensure ongoing 
maintenance was practical. People tended to publish caches 
in places local to them for this reason or at least in places 
where they visited on a frequent and regular basis. As cache 
owners they do not want to be responsible for other’s 
frustrations of travelling to a location only to find the cache 
no longer exists or some elements not working effectively.
“The other one we have done is a multi cache but that is quite hard 
to maintain because we have hidden things in places which are the 
nest places to hide them. They keep rolling out or get lost in the 
mud or eaten by squirrels or... they are micros to find the first set 
of coordinates which lead to a traditional cache. We haven’t had 
trouble with the traditional one, it’s the micros that go missing and
then you feel bad when a family has gone out for the day and they 
haven’t actually found the cache because one of the micros has 
been eaten by a squirrel – so you have to go out and fix it pretty 
quickly.”
DISCUSSION
Through the study presented in this paper we have taken a 
look at geocaching as an everyday practice, highlighting the 
social motivations and behaviours accompanying it. In 
contrast to previous work in the area, the study has taken a 
more holistic view of the activity that has highlighted 
interestingly new characteristics of the activity and what it 
enables from a social perspective. This understanding of 
geocaching as everyday practice is of interest not just itself 
but also provides some useful new perspectives for thinking 
about location-based and geo-enabled experiences more 
generally. We reflect on some of those here.
First, while geocaching is defined in terms of the treasure 
hunt and the find, this is actually the end point in a much 
larger part of the consumption experience. For many 
people, geocaching was an opportunity for social occasion, 
a walk with family or friends. There are several features of 
geocaching that facilitated this. First, it provided purpose 
and motivation to a walk that was important in getting 
people involved in the social activity – in particular younger 
children. Second, the technology aspect of the location- 
based experience was actually backgrounded for large parts 
of the social occasion being brought out intermittently when 
necessary. In this sense it neither dominated nor hindered 
the possibilities for social interaction. Finally, it supported 
differentiated participation by different members of a social 
group. Not everyone needed the key technology to take part 
in the group activity. And members of a social group could 
participate as much or as little as possible in the location- 
based aspect of the geocaching experience while still being 
part of the group (e.g. just going for a walk with the group).
A second thing the research has shown is the significance of 
considering it as an ongoing practice that builds up over 
time. In understanding geocaching and other similar 
location-based experiences, it is overly simplistic to look for 
explanations of behaviour just within the characteristics of 
an individual discrete experience. In geocaching practices, 
much of the meaning, motivation and behaviour associated 
with it was shaped as much by what a geocacher has 
achieved to date (in terms of caches completed, travel bugs 
accessed etc) as it was by the characteristics of the next 
cache. One cannot understand the impulses and urges to get 
out and do another cache without considering it as an 
ongoing achievement. This is an important perspective for 
thinking about other location-based experiences.
A third issue concerns the creation and consumption. For 
many geocachers, both these aspects of the activity were a 
significant part of the experience, though there was an 
asymmetry in terms of effort involved and experience 
required. Creating the experience for someone else is more 
demanding in terms of time and mental effort than 
consuming those experiences created by others. While 
allowing other people to create location-based experiences 
or annotate space is not new per se, there has not been any
1185
