CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Study	Total Tasks	Total Visits	Total Repeat Visits	Avg. # of	Avg. # of
				Tasks/	Sessions/
				Participant	Task
Diary Study	85	204	119	3.86	2.40
Field Study	150	391	241	6.25	2.61
Table 4. Multi-session Tasks and Web Sessions
for the Diary and Field Studies
during the first week). Ten of these tasks were recorded as 
unexpected. The average number of multi-session tasks for 
each participant was 3.86 tasks. The tasks (85) were worked 
on over a total of 204 sessions (the number of web sessions 
that participants worked on multi-session tasks). 
Participants worked on each task on average over 2.4 
sessions.
Field Study
Over the field study, 150 multi-session tasks were recorded 
(see Table 4), with 16 reported as unexpected. The average 
number of tasks per participant was 6.25. Participants 
worked on each task over an average of 2.61 sessions.
Since the field study was run over a four week period, it 
makes sense that there would be more tasks recorded and 
that number of tasks per participant was larger. It is 
interesting that the average number of sessions per task did 
not increase much, indicating that multi-session tasks for 
both studies are similar in the number of times the 
participants worked on a multi-session task.
In the diary study, we were only able to count how often a 
participant worked on their multi-session tasks. In the field 
study, however, we were also able to determine the total 
number of web sessions that took place over the study and 
what proportion of sessions contained multi-session tasks. 
There were a total of 1183 web sessions (which for this 
study, was each time the browser was opened and closed), 
of which 391 sessions contained multi-session tasks. There 
were 226 sessions in which participants worked solely on 
multi-session tasks, although occasionally they worked on 
more than one multi-session task during these sessions.
We were also able to determine when participants switched 
between a multi-session task and other web activities from 
the log that captured the toggling of the include/exclude 
radio buttons on the toolbar (see Figure 2 (c)). All 24 
participants switched from their multi-session tasks during 
the study. When a participant was working on a multi- 
session task they could include or exclude a web page in a 
tab or window from that task (see Table 1 for an example in 
the log of including a tab into the task). For example, when 
the participant had a web page open that was not being used 
for the current multi-session task they would exclude that 
tab. By default, the tab or window that a multi-session task 
was started or continued from was included in the current 
task along with any tabs or windows opened from an 
included tab/window. We logged four different actions that 
indicated a switch between tasks (see Table 5).
Logged Action	Count
Included this tab in the current task: Switched into task	196
Excluded	this	tab	from	the	current	task:	129
Switched away from task	
Switched into task	136
Switched away from task	166
TOTAL	627
Table 5. Switching between Tasks
The action “Included this tab...” and “Excluded this tab...” 
was logged every time a participant used the include/ 
exclude button on the toolbar. The “Switched into task” 
and “Switched away from task” was logged every time a 
participant switched to a previously defined tab/window 
(included or excluded). In total, 627 task switching actions 
were recorded.
Browser Tools and Actions
The results presented below are based on diary entries (in 
terms of counts as recorded by participants), field study 
logs (actual counts as recorded by the browser logger) and 
post-study interviews (for specific revisitation tools).
Diary Study
For the diary study, participants were asked to record which 
browser tools or actions that they used while working on 
their multi-session tasks. While we can not track how often 
the tools or actions were used within each session, it does 
indicate what tools/actions were used for the multi-session 
tasks. This was useful in deciding what tools and actions we 
needed to track during the field study, and it did give us an 
indication as to the most common tools and actions used for 
their multi-session tasks. Overall there were 35 different 
tools or actions recorded by participants. Table 6 shows the 
top twelve tools and actions. Opening a window was the 
most often reported action during a multi-session task, as 
recorded 62 times by a variety of participants, followed by 
using a search engine and typing in a web page address.
In the post study interviews, we questioned participants on 
their use of bookmarks or other tools that they may have 
used to revisit information while working on multi-session 
tasks. Similar to other studies [1, 2, 3, 4, 15], the use of 
bookmarks and reasons for not using them varied among 
the participants. Half of the participants had used 
bookmarks for the task which was examined in the 
interview. Firefox users (whether they frequently used
Tool/Action	Num.	Tool/Action	Num.
Open Window	62	Open Tabs	24
Use a Search Engine	57	Add Bookmarks	23
Type a URL	42	Use auto complete	18
Search within a Web Page	37	Save a Web Page	18
Paste To	31	Print a Web Page	17
Open a Bookmark	26	Use History	16
Table 6. Top Tool or Actions Reported in the Diary Study
1193
