CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 1: A Sample List of active Multi-session Tasks
Participants recorded their multi-session tasks using a web- 
based diary over the study period (18 participants for a one 
week study period, and four participants for a two week 
study period). We met with participants at the beginning to 
describe the study. We explained multi-session tasks (both 
expected and not expected) and demonstrated the web 
diary. Recorded multi-session tasks could be both expected 
and unexpected. For this study, participants were asked to 
record, as a session, each time they visited the Web to work 
on the task. Participants were asked to use their web diary 
each time they began and returned to a multi-session task. 
The tasks could have begun previously to the study and 
could continue after the study. At the end of the study, 
participants took part in a semi-structured interview.
We provided a password protected web-based worksheet to 
minimize the effort of the participants to record task 
information. The diary worksheet contained radio buttons, 
checks, comment boxes, and drop-down lists for easy input. 
When users added a new task, the task was added to their 
active task list for later selection (Figure 1).
Participants were encouraged to keep the diary open in a 
separate browser window or tab when they used the Web 
and to fill in the diary as the task occurred (although they 
could enter the information at a later time). The diary 
recorded: the task name, task description, if the task was 
expected or not, estimated finish date or time when the task 
would end, reason to stop working on the task, where the 
task was performed, what was worked on during the 
session, the browser tools they used during the session and 
finally if the overall task was complete. The name, 
description, expected finish date and whether it was 
expected or unexpected were only recorded once during the 
initial session of the task.
At the end of the study, participants took part in a semi- 
structured interview. Participants were asked to go through 
one of their multi-session tasks in detail and were asked 
questions regarding the concept of multi-session tasks in 
general (e.g., “Are the tools you use for multi-session tasks 
different than other tasks?”). We demonstrated up to four 
tools to get the participants’ feedback as to their 
appropriateness for multi-session tasks: tabs to the IE users, 
session saver, Landmarks [14], and an annotation tool.
Based on the participants’ diary entries and comments 
during the interviews, we were able to further refine our 
definition of multi-session tasks. We expanded our original 
definition of multi-session to be a task that is goal based,
that often requires sub-tasks to complete, and that has a 
temporal element (i.e., the task has a deadline or is finished 
once the goal is achieved).
Field Study
We then ran a four week field study where participants used 
a customized version of Firefox for all of their web 
browsing sessions. This customized version logged all of 
their interactions in the browser. Twenty-four university 
students (20 male and 4 female) were recruited to 
participate. We recruited participants who used the Web 
daily, and who used Firefox as their main web browser. 
There were 14 computer science students, 6 commerce 
students, and 4 were from health profession studies 
(kinesiology, occupational therapy, health informatics, 
health and human performance). Six of the 24 participants 
were graduate students. The age of participants ranged 
from 18 to 35 years old with an average age of 24. A large 
majority of participants (21/24) indicated that they use the 
Web several times a day, and 58% (14/24) checked that 
they used the Web at least 11 hours a week. Participants 
were compensated $50 for finishing the study.
We met with participants at the beginning of the study to 
explain the details of the study, to demonstrate and install 
our browser and to define multi-session tasks. We used the 
modified definition from the diary study. For this study, a 
session was logged each time they opened and closed the 
browser. Consequently, we captured both the times of all 
activities and periods of inactivity.
Over the study period, participants used our browser for all 
their web use. The browser not only logged all of the 
participants’ interactions with the browser but also had an 
additional toolbar Figure 2 (a) that was used by participants
only when they worked on multi-session tasks. Participants
were asked to submit daily web logs using a submit button 
built into the toolbar. If there were any problems with 
submitting the log electronically, the log was stored on their 
hard drive, although no problems occurred during the study.
Our customized version of Firefox captured all user 
interactions in a log format as shown in Table 1. All logged 
data was stored on a secure server only accessible by the 
researchers. Each participant accessed the browser with a 
unique username/password to ensure that the logs only 
contained the study participants’ data. The log contained 
the following information: Computer, Event Id, Window Id, 
Tab Id, Date, Time, Name, URL and Session Description.
Participants could install the browser on multiple computers 
thereby providing access to their multi-session tasks from 
any location. Computer was a self chosen name by the 
participant representing the computer that the browser was 
installed on. Each action that the participant did on the 
browser was given a unique Event Id number. When a new 
window or tab was opened during a session they were 
numbered (Window Id and Tab Id respectively) starting at 
0. The Date and Time were recorded for each action. The
1189
