CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Exploring Multi-session Web Tasks
Bonnie MacKay and Carolyn Watters
Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University
Halifax, NS, B3H 1W5, Canada
{bmackay, watters }@cs.dal.ca
ABSTRACT
Users are now performing more sophisticated web tasks. In 
this work, we explore web tasks that require multiple web 
sessions to complete (multi-session tasks) to satisfy a goal. 
We conducted a web-based diary study and a field study 
that used a customized version of Firefox which logged the 
participants’ interactions for multi-session tasks and all 
their web activity. We found that multi-session tasks occur 
frequently and that users utilize a variety of browser tools 
and actions to help complete these tasks.
Author Keywords
Web tasks, diary study, field study, multi-session tasks.
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
There has been a growth of information available on the 
Web and as result there has been an evolution of the type of 
tasks that people perform. For example, today many tasks 
can be performed using services available on the Web (e.g., 
booking a flight, or buying a new dress). Despite this 
growth in how the Web is being used, most tools provided 
by the popular browsers have not changed much. Browser 
tools tend to still focus on supporting tasks that can be 
completed in a single web browser session and there are 
few standard browser tools available to users to support 
tasks that require multiple web sessions to complete.
While research has been conducted on user behaviour for 
single web session tasks, for specific web tasks, and for 
monitoring web information, we are exploring non- 
monitoring tasks that take multiple web sessions to 
complete (multi-session tasks). A multi-session task is goal- 
based, requires more than one web session to complete and, 
has a definable point as to when the task is over, such as a 
specific date, an event that occurs (e.g., you finally 
purchase the computer), or that it is abandoned. It is not a
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00 
routine task (e.g., reading the news every day or checking 
your email on a regular basis).
In this research, we are interested in learning about the type 
of tasks that cross multiple web sessions, in finding out how 
users are performing these tasks (i.e., what browser tools 
they are using) and in determining what problems they 
encounter while performing these tasks. We anticipate that 
users will have some difficulties performing multi-session 
tasks while also doing other web activities in a single 
session (i.e., multi-tasking) and in resuming their task when 
they return to it at a later time. We expect that most multi- 
session tasks are expected, that is that when the user begins 
the task they know that it will continue over several 
sessions. We also expect that there will be occasions when 
a user begins a task that they assume will take a single 
session to complete but it unexpectedly turns into a multi- 
session task (i.e., there is not enough time to finish or the 
task is more complex than originally thought). We also 
anticipate that when users are performing these tasks, they 
use particular browser tools and possibly other applications 
to help organize the information that they find (such as print 
web pages), and that users may use other applications to 
interpret information (such as a calculator).
We use the results of a diary study and field study to 
determine how to better support users performing multi- 
session tasks. The contribution of this research includes a 
characterization of how users perform multi-session tasks, a 
characterization of these tasks, and it provides 
recommendations for browser tool features to help support 
multi-session tasks.
RELATED WORK
Web Tasks
There has been a lot of research conducted on user 
behaviour on the Web to try to understand and/or categorize 
the different types of web tasks in which people perform [1, 
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 17]. For example, Choo et al. [6] outlined 
four task categories for the Web, and Sellen et al. [15] 
found six web task categories based on observation. Kellar, 
et al. [12], classified web tasks, similar to Sellen et al. [15] 
as fact finding (e.g., looking for specific information), 
information gathering (e.g., researching a paper), browsing 
(e.g., entertainment or passing time), transactions (e.g., 
online banking), communications (e.g., emailing), and 
maintenance (e.g., updating a web page). Kellar et al. [1 1] 
also explored web monitoring and found that monitoring of
1187
