CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Large Scale Analysis of Web Revisitation Patterns
Eytan Adar
University of Washington, CSE
101 Paul G. Allen Center, Seattle, WA 98195
eadar@cs.washington.edu
ABSTRACT
Our work examines Web revisitation patterns. Everybody 
revisits Web pages, but their reasons for doing so can differ 
depending on the particular Web page, their topic of 
interest, and their intent. To characterize how people revisit 
Web content, we analyzed five weeks of Web interaction 
logs of over 612,000 users. We supplemented these 
findings by a survey intended to identify the intent behind 
the observed revisitation. Our analysis reveals four primary 
revisitation patterns, each with unique behavioral, content, 
and structural characteristics. Through our analysis we 
illustrate how understanding revisitation patterns can enable 
Web sites to provide improved navigation, Web browsers to 
predict users’ destinations, and search engines to better 
support fast, fresh, and effective finding and re-finding.
Author Keywords
Query log analysis, Web behavior, revisitation, re-finding.
ACM Classification Keywords
H3.3. Information storage and retrieval: Information search 
and retrieval; H5.4: Hypertext/Hypermedia. – User issues.
INTRODUCTION
Revisiting Web pages is common, but an individual’s 
reasons for returning to different pages can be diverse. For 
example, a person may revisit a shopping site’s homepage 
every couple of weeks to check for sales. That same person 
may also revisit the site’s listing of fantasy books many 
times in just a few minutes while trying to find a new book.
To better understand Web page revisitation, we analyzed 
the interaction logs of a large number of opt-in users over a 
period of five weeks. The logs contained a history of all of 
the Web page visits made by more than 612,000 users. 
Thanks to the large quantity of data, it was possible for us 
to explore the revisitation patterns for specific Web pages 
along a number of dimensions not previously feasible. We 
observed that even very similar pages can have very
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00 
Jaime Teevan, Susan T. Dumais
Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052
{teevan,sdumais}@microsoft.com
different revisitation patterns. Our analysis suggests such 
differences can be due to a number of factors, including a 
person’s intent, page content, and site structure.
The log data enables us to characterize the differences 
between revisitation patterns, but it is difficult to deduce 
revisitation intent without a more detailed survey or 
observational data. For example, someone may revisit a 
Web page frequently during a short interval of time because 
they are monitoring changing content contained in the page, 
or they may do so because they are using the site as a hub to 
navigate to linked pages. For this reason, we supplemented 
the log data with a survey in which we asked participants to 
describe their reasons for revisiting specific pages.
By combining revisitation patterns and survey data, we find 
four main patterns of revisitation that are characterized by 
various factors including usage, content, structure, and 
intent. This analysis can enable Web sites, Web browsers, 
and search engines to better support revisitation, and we 
discuss the design implications of our findings.
RELATED WORK
Early research aimed at understanding general Web 
navigation and surfing behavior first reported a large 
amount of re-access of information (e.g., [4]). To better 
understand and quantify this phenomenon, subsequent 
studies were designed to specifically address revisitation 
behavior. These studies come primarily in two main flavors 
(though some, like our own, mix elements):
•	Log studies, where browsing patterns are monitored 
either through proxies or instrumented browsers ([6, 9, 
14, 17, 23]).
•	Survey/interview studies, in which a questionnaire or
interview is constructed to understand specific 
behaviors ([1, 13, 21]).
Studies of revisitation have demonstrated that 50% [9, 23] 
to 80% [6] of all Web surfing behavior involves pages that 
users have previously visited. While many revisitations 
occur shortly after a page’s first visit (e.g., during the same 
session using the back button), a significant number occur 
after a considerable amount of time has elapsed [17].
Two significant outcomes of earlier efforts have been the 
creation of taxonomies of browsing behavior in relationship 
to revisitation [14] and suggestions for improving the 
design of Web browsers [1, 17], search engines [1, 25, 26], 
and personal information management systems [10].
1197
