CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
site, serves weather at weather.msn.com. Those that serve 
multiple roles have URLs that fall more equally into all 
groups. For example, EsMas, www.esmas.com, a Spanish 
language portal and media site that provides shopping, 
classifieds, news, galleries, and many other features has a 
fairly even split across groups (with no significant over-
representation in any group).
DESIGN IMPLICATIONS
Web Browser Design
Previous studies of the revisitation patterns of individual 
users have led to numerous browser enhancements [2, 11, 
13, 15, 22]. In one study, Cockburn et al. [7] explored 
presenting a user’s history as a series of Web page 
thumbnails enhanced with information about the user’s 
page visit frequency, and allowed the user to group 
thumbnails to visualize “hub-and-spoke” revisitation 
patterns. Given the results presented here, we believe there 
may be value in providing awareness of, and grouping by, a 
broader range of revisitation patterns. For example, users 
may want to quickly sort previously visited pages into 
groups corresponding to a working stack (recently accessed 
fast pages), a frequent stack (medium and hybrid pages), 
and a searchable stack (slow pages).
Several history mechanisms have tried to predict whether 
people will access a Web page based on overall measures of 
last access time and frequency of access. It may be possible 
to better predict the future utility of a URL by taking into 
account the page’s revisitation pattern. For example, if a 
page is visited weekly and the user has not visited it in 
almost seven days, it is very likely to be revisited soon. On 
the other hand, a page the user visits daily but that was just 
visited is unlikely to be visited in the immediate future.
More accurate predictions of the future utility of a Web 
page can be used in many ways. The color of the page’s 
URL could change to indicate increased potential interest, 
or the address bar’s completion drop-down list could favor 
URLs that are likely to be accessed. Alternatively, such 
pages could be proactively recommended and the content 
pre-fetched [3] for efficiency in browsing or indexing.
In order for a Web browser to take advantage of revisitation 
patterns for a page or site, aggregate visitation data could be 
made available by the site itself. If this is not feasible, it 
may be possible to predict the page’s revisitation pattern by 
classifying it using non-behavioral features like text and 
link structure. Initial explorations indicate this approach is 
promising. Personalized revisitation patterns could further 
be combined with aggregate observations or predictions.
Search Engine Implications
Revisitation analysis also has a number of implications for 
search engine design and in particular to the related issue of 
re-finding. Prior research has demonstrated re-finding 
behavior is prevalent [19, 25] in search engine use. Our 
analysis, which further demonstrates a relationship between
search and specific kinds of revisitation behavior, suggests 
several ways search engines can support re-finding.
For repeat searches, there is a tension between displaying 
new results and preserving previously viewed results [24]. 
It may be particularly important for search engines to 
provide consistent results for queries that return many slow 
and hybrid pages, since these searches are likely to be used 
to re-find pages found a long time ago. Though consistency 
can be achieved by keeping the results displayed static, it 
may be better achieved through personalization where the 
results an individual is likely to revisit are emphasized.
The revisitation patterns of pages returned for a query can 
tell the search engine something about the searcher’s 
information need. Depending on the particular task or 
distribution of results, the search engine could include 
pages that had consistent or diverse revisitation patterns.
The types of pages a person is interested in may also 
suggest how receptive that person is to new information 
(e.g. suggestions of related content or advertisements). For 
example, if a query returns results that are generally in the 
fast group, this could indicate that the user is looking for 
something new and may be particularly responsive to the 
suggestion of relevant content. On the other hand, if the 
results are primarily in the medium or slow revisit groups, 
the user may be more likely to have a specific intent and not 
respond to suggestions. Content that is somewhat 
orthogonal to the user’s objective may be most helpful in 
these cases by appealing to different interests.
Search engines may also benefit by taking into account 
users revisitation behaviors when crawling the Web. 
Assuming changes to page content are correlated with 
people’s aggregate revisitation patterns, the revisitation 
patterns could indicate the optimal rate for re-crawling and 
re-indexing different Web sites.
Web Site Design
Just as search engines may want to make it easy to find 
slow and hybrid pages, Web site designers may want to 
ensure that such pages are easy to find. This could be done 
by creating appropriate keyword lists for indexing, 
minimizing page change and movement, and providing 
navigational shortcuts from common search landing pages.
Modeling users in terms of revisitation behavior might 
allow a Web site designer to apply our results in the design 
of their site. By taking into account the four potential 
revisitation styles, in conjunction with the site design and 
content, information architects can understand and simulate 
user behavior with their Web sites. This may make it 
possible for designers to understand potential interaction 
patterns even before the Web site is launched, and to 
evaluate a site’s success in meeting the design objectives.
Finally, we believe there are opportunities for Web site 
designers to better support monitoring activities. For 
example, some Web sites create a list of “what’s new” to 
aid in repeat visitors’ discovery of new content. Our
1205
