CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
needed content later on. Kellar et al. [14] interviewed Web 
users about content-monitoring habits, and identified 
information-gathering as a class of activity that often 
involved revisiting sites to monitor for changed 
information. They found that people relied on a 
combination of bookmarks, auto-completion, and search 
engines to return to the sites they monitored. Teevan et al. 
[25] conducted a study of Yahoo!’s query logs showing that 
nearly 40% of queries were attempts to re-find previously 
encountered results. Tauscher and Greenberg [24] studied 
users’ browser logs over a six-week period, and found that 
58% of the pages visited were actually re-visits, while 
Cockburn and MacKenzie [5] reported an even higher rate 
of revisitation (81%). Wen [28] asked study participants to 
re-find pages that they had visited during a search task, and 
observed an overall success rate below 20%. Nearly all 
participants in Wen’s study tried to re-create their search 
paths to re-find information. A more recent study by 
Obendorf et al. [19] found that about 44% of pages visited 
were revisits. Their study revealed that users employed 
strategies such as re-searching and re-tracing to re-find 
content viewed a week or more in the past, but the authors 
noted that such strategies often frustrated users, due to 
problems remembering their original query or to expired 
link coloring information. They also note that browser 
history was nearly unused by participants, initiating only 
0.2% of all actions despite the high rate of re-visitation.
In summary, there is significant evidence that re-finding 
information constitutes a significant portion of Web use, 
and that current browser-based mechanisms that support 
this activity are poorly utilized. Obendorf et al. noted that 
“A time and task based search history could help to redo 
searches.” SearchBar is a realization of such a system.
Interruptions, Multi-tasking, and Multi-Session Tasks
In addition to re-finding previously encountered 
information, another user need not explicitly addressed by 
current Web interfaces is task resumption after an 
interruption. This interruption might be self-generated (i.e., 
multi-tasking) or externally generated.
Previous Research on Interruptions and Search
Interruptions often cause people to forget the nature of a 
task they meant to complete [18]. Such interruptions are 
common – a diary study of knowledge workers found an 
average of 50 task shifts per person during a typical work 
week [6], and a log study found an average of 3.74 e-mail 
or IM-driven task shifts per hour, taking between 8 and 10 
minutes on average for the person to return to the 
interrupted task [9]. However, previous work has not 
specifically explored how users manage interruptions 
during Web search tasks, as we do in our study.
Sellen et al.’s study of knowledge workers’ Web use [23] 
reported that 40% of the “information gathering” activities 
they observed (similar to Broder’s definition of 
“informational searches” [3]) were not completed in a 
single sitting, often due to external interruptions. Such 
“multi-session” information-seeking activities were also
Table 1. The 170 respondents who had resumed a Web search
after a gap in time reported the longest gap they recalled between
suspension and resumption.
Time Before Resumption	Respondents
Minutes	1.2%
Hours	24%
Days	51%
Weeks	13%
Months	10%
Years	1.2%
reported by Obendorf et al. [19], whose client-side log 
study of Web use found that an average of 15% of Web 
page revisits occurred after periods of a week or more; 
while this represented only a small portion of Web activity, 
the users in their study indicated that these long-term 
revisits were important but were difficult to achieve.
Survey on Search Habits
To learn more about multi-session Web investigations, we 
conducted our own formative study, surveying information 
workers at a large technology company about their Web 
search habits and needs. Our survey was sent to 740 people 
and was completed by 204 (28% response rate). 80% of 
respondents were male. Ages ranged from 21 – 61 years old 
(median = 36). Respondents had varied job roles within the 
company, such as software developers, researchers, 
managers, administrative assistants, attorneys, and student 
interns. All respondents self-identified as average (27%) or 
expert (74%) Web searchers, with none identifying as 
novice. All but one respondent reported using a search 
engine to find information online at least once per day. Our 
survey asked questions about a variety of Web use habits, 
many of which are beyond the scope of this paper. Here, we 
report only on portions of the survey relevant to the 
suspension, resumption, and/or re-execution of information- 
seeking tasks. We also highlight that the data presented in 
this section are self-reported, so we use these results as 
design guidelines but cannot verify their absolute accuracy.
We found that multi-session information-seeking tasks were 
a common experience among this demographic, with 83% 
of respondents answering “Yes” to the question “Have you 
ever had a Web information-seeking task that has lasted for 
longer than a single session (i. e., a task which you put aside 
and resumed at a later time)?”
We asked several follow-up questions to the 170 
respondents who reported engaging in multi-session 
investigations. First, we asked them to report the longest 
gap they had experienced between suspending and 
resuming an investigation. The results in Table 1 show 
these responses, which indicate that time gaps before 
resumption can be lengthy – 75% indicated experiencing 
gaps of at least a full day, while 24% reported gaps of a 
week or more before resumption.
We then asked these respondents to describe the strategies
1208
