CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
SearchBar: A Search-Centric Web History for Task
Resumption and Information Re-finding
Dan Morris, Meredith Ringel Morris, Gina Venolia
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA
{dan, merrie, gina.venolia}@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Current user interfaces for Web search, including browsers 
and search engine sites, typically treat search as a transient 
activity. However, people often conduct complex, multi- 
query investigations that may span long durations and may 
be interrupted by other tasks. In this paper, we first present 
the results of a survey of users’ search habits, which show 
that many search tasks span long periods of time. We then 
introduce SearchBar, a system for proactively and 
persistently storing query histories, browsing histories, and 
users’ notes and ratings in an interrelated fashion. 
SearchBar supports multi-session investigations by 
assisting with task context resumption and information re- 
finding. We describe a user study comparing use of 
SearchBar to status-quo tools such as browser histories, and 
discuss our findings, which show that users find SearchBar 
valuable for task reacquisition. Our study also reveals the 
strategies employed by users of status-quo tools for 
handling multi-query, multi-session search tasks.
Author Keywords
Web search interfaces, Web history, persistent search.
ACM Classification Keywords
H3.3. Information search and retrieval: Search process.
INTRODUCTION
Web browsers and search engine sites are the primary tools 
people use to access the vast quantities of information 
available online. These tools typically treat information- 
seeking tasks as a transient activity, considering each of a 
user’s search and browse actions as unrelated events rather 
than as part of a larger task. For example, if a user is 
searching for information on digital cameras, he will 
perform several low-level interactions with a Web browser 
and one or more search engines, e.g. typing the URL of a 
search engine site, querying for “digital camera ratings”, 
clicking a result, hitting the back button, submitting a 
second query, etc. Although the browser views these 
actions as unrelated events, the user views them at a task
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
level, i.e., “figure out what digital camera to purchase”, and 
current search UIs don’t provide affordances at this level.
Considering search and browse actions in isolation results 
in impoverished user interfaces that do not adequately assist 
users with common scenarios such as re-finding previously 
encountered Web pages, resuming an activity after an 
interruption, or conducting complex, multi-session 
investigations. In this paper, we present evidence that users 
often conduct multi-session Web investigations, along with 
evidence that such tasks are not adequately supported by 
current tools. We then present SearchBar, a system for 
proactively and persistently storing query histories, 
browsing histories, and users’ notes and ratings in an 
interrelated fashion. We describe a study comparing 
SearchBar to status quo interfaces for Web information- 
seeking tasks, and report detailed findings on both the 
benefits of the SearchBar approach and on users’ general 
strategies for handling complex, exploratory search tasks. 
We conclude with a discussion of related and future work.
Throughout this paper, we use the term query to refer 
specifically to keyword search using a general-purpose or 
vertical search engine, and the terms search and 
investigation to refer to the high-level task of finding 
content online using a variety of methods, such as querying, 
browsing, or navigating directly to known URLs.
MOTIVATION
In this section, we discuss research that highlights some of 
the shortcomings of current tools for information-seeking 
tasks, specifically re-finding information and managing 
interruptions during information-seeking.
Re-finding and Re-searching
Several studies have found that people frequently revisit 
previously viewed online content. For example, Aula et 
al.’s survey of experienced Web users [1] found that people 
use search engines more frequently than history or 
bookmarking tools to re-find online information, but often 
have difficulty remembering what queries they had used 
when they originally discovered the content in question. 
Jones et al. [11] conducted interviews about how people 
“keep found things found”, and discovered that the most 
common strategy for re-finding information was to “do 
nothing”, i.e. to not take explicit actions such as 
bookmarking or taking notes, but rather to assume 
(sometimes incorrectly) that one would be able to re-find
1207
