CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
extensive use of browser tabs among our participants: 
although we did not recruit participants for familiarity with 
tabs and did not recruit from a highly technical user 
population, all sixteen participants opened multiple tabs 
during the study. This is in contrast with results reported by 
Weinreich et al [27], who noted that seven of thirteen 
Firefox users in a 2006 log study “hardly opened any tabs”. 
We hypothesize that this dramatic increase in tab use 
represents increased adoption of tabs even in the short span 
of time since that work was published.
We also specifically observed a previously-unreported use 
of browser tabs as a mechanism for managing interruptions 
in search tasks: during the first session, all sixteen 
participants opened a new tab in response to an interrupting 
search task. This indicates that the creation of a new tab is 
potentially a valuable statistical indicator of a boundary 
between tasks, and may be applied to automatic delineation 
of Web search topics or to intelligent timing of 
interruptions and alerts. This may help address one of 
SearchBar’s primary limitations, namely its reliance on the 
user to delineate task boundaries.
Additionally, our evaluation suggests that typical Web users 
make use of multiple search engines: 88% of participants 
used multiple general-purpose and/or vertical search 
engines. This motivates the need for a client-side tool for 
logging query histories; server-side history tools hosted by 
a search engine will log only searches conducted at that 
site. Coupled with the privacy implications of using search 
engines as primary re-finding instruments, which requires 
storing a persistent personal browsing history on a remote 
server, client-side support for re-finding may be desirable.
One possible limitation of our evaluation’s ecological 
validity is that no additional content was inserted into 
SearchBar between sessions, which may not be typical of a 
one-week interruption in a search task. However, the tools 
typically used for restoring search context – history, 
favorites, link coloring, autocomplete notes – would all also 
have been subject to increased “clutter” over a week of real- 
world use, and we hypothesize that due to SearchBar’s use 
of a semantically-meaningful hierarchy based on topics and 
queries, users would be more easily able to sort through 
clutter using SearchBar than using existing mechanisms.
RELATED WORK
Browser Features
Several mechanisms for representing browsing history and 
re-finding information are ubiquitous in current Web 
browsers. Browsers provide a comprehensive and 
proactively-collected navigation history that can be sorted 
alphabetically or chronologically (although this history is 
rarely utilized [1]) and a mechanism for actively collecting 
relevant links into a hierarchy (referred to as “favorites” or 
“bookmarks” depending on the browser). Browsers also 
support coloring of HTML links conditioned on whether a 
link has been previously visited within a specified time 
window, in order to assist users in re-tracing (or avoiding
re-tracing) navigation paths. Browsers also offer automatic 
completion of partial URLs or terms entered into text entry 
fields for both navigation and search, based on recently- 
visited pages or recently-executed queries, which can also 
assist in query recall or re-finding of URLs.
Commercial Systems
Several commercial services assist users in collecting and 
re-finding Web-based information. Google Web History 
provides server-side logging of Google searches a user 
conducts and results subsequently clicked; a user can later 
view all queries and results clicked in a chronological list. 
This service also allows users to search pages they have 
visited directly from Google searches; installation of the 
Google Toolbar optionally extends this history list and 
search capacity to all Web pages a user has visited. This 
service has the advantage of existing on a remote server and 
thus traveling with a user to multiple computers, but is not 
integrated directly with Web browsing (as SearchBar is), 
does not capture queries from other search sites, and 
requires the user to consent to fairly comprehensive server- 
side logging and tracking. Del.icio.us is an online 
bookmarking service, which allows bookmarks to travel 
with a user and allows sharing of bookmarks among users. 
Google Notebook similarly allows server-side storage of 
links, and also allows storage of notes and images. Onfolio 
is an extension to the Windows Live Toolbar that provides 
similar note-taking and “clipping” functionality as a client- 
side application.
Research Systems
Several systems enable users to manually create collections 
of online content. Session Highlights [10] provides a 
workspace to which users can drag URLs, similar to a 
conventional bookmarking system but using thumbnails to 
represent pages and employing a strict chronological 
ordering. WebView [4] provides a thumbnail-based web 
history that can be ordered chronologically or hierarchically 
by site. Flagging of useful pages both implicitly and 
explicitly is integrated directly into the history system by 
showing “dog-ear” marks on page thumbnails, representing 
either an explicitly-marked page or a frequently-visited 
page. The Hunter Gatherer system [22] allows users to 
highlight components of a Web page and, using a shortcut 
key, place those components into a persistent notebook. 
Dontcheva et al. [7] present a system for summarizing 
personal web browsing sessions, which presents a richer 
summary than that provided by SearchBar, but at the cost of 
more manual intervention and annotation. Jones et al. [12] 
explore the needs of users managing complex projects that 
span multiple applications, including Web search, and 
introduce the Project Planner system, which allows users to 
organize a variety of task-related content.
The SearchPad [2] system was designed as a lightweight 
notebook that assisted users in keeping track of a search’s 
progress, and is similar to SearchBar in that its organization 
is centered around queries. SearchPad supported passive 
storage of queries, and it modified search engine result
1215
