CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
pages the user has indicated as especially relevant, as well 
as giving a chronological history of all the queries issued 
and pages visited on that topic. All queries and pages in the 
summary and in the standard SearchBar display are 
hyperlinks that return the user to the associated query 
results or Web page.
EVALUATION
We conducted a study to evaluate the usability of 
SearchBar, and to explore whether it would be more 
effective in allowing users to manage, suspend, and resume 
multi-session, multi-query searches than status-quo tools. 
All of our study’s tasks fall into Broder’s “informational” 
task category [3]; this is consistent with our focus on 
complex, multi-session searches.
Demographics
We recruited 16 paid participants (9 female), none affiliated 
with our institution, ranging in age from their 20’s to their 
60’s. Participants had a variety of occupations, and included 
an attorney, an editor, a business owner, a marketing 
specialist, and an insurance salesperson. Only two 
participants had technical professions.
Methodology
Our study had a between-subjects design, with eight 
participants each in the control and experimental 
conditions. In the control condition, participants completed 
the study tasks using Internet Explorer 7, and in the 
experimental condition participants used Internet Explorer 7 
with the SearchBar plugin. The two conditions were 
otherwise identical. Each participant came to the lab for two 
sessions, each 90 minutes long, scheduled one week apart.
When participants arrived for the first session, they were 
seated at a dual-monitor (19” each) computer. Internet 
Explorer 7 (with the SearchBar plugin, in the experimental 
condition) was open on the left monitor, with the home 
page set to a search engine site, and a “Travel Itinerary” 
document was open on the right monitor.
Participants were told that they would play the role of the 
administrative assistant to the CEO of a fictional 
corporation. The CEO had requested that the assistant 
complete the itinerary for his upcoming business trip to 
Prague (none of the participants had ever visited Prague). 
The participant was given a printed copy of an e-mail from 
the CEO describing his itinerary requirements, such as the 
dates of his travel, his desire to visit three famous historic 
sites, see three theatre productions, etc. They were 
instructed to fill in the travel itinerary document, which 
initially contained only headings such as “museums”, 
“theatre”, etc., as per the requests in the CEO’s e-mail.
Participants were also told that the CEO might interrupt 
them by sending instant messages (IMs) if he required 
immediate assistance. Participants were also told that they 
could use any available tools to assist them in managing 
their task, including pen and paper (provided), the Word, 
Excel, and Notepad applications (to which shortcuts were 
placed on the computer’s desktop), or any features of
Internet Explorer (e.g., bookmarks, history). If participants 
were in the experimental condition, we also introduced 
them to SearchBar, allowing them to complete a tutorial 
and ask questions. Participants were not told anything about 
what would occur during the second week of the study.
After each participant had been working on the travel 
itinerary task for seven minutes, the experimenter sent an 
IM (playing the role of the CEO) asking for the name of a 
restaurant in Chicago that served New York Style pizza 
where he could take a client for lunch during a business 
trip. After the participant sent a response, the CEO told him 
to resume working on the itinerary. After the participant 
worked on the itinerary for seven more minutes, the CEO 
sent another IM, asking the assistant to recommend a digital 
camera he should purchase that met certain resolution and 
zoom requirements. Afterwards, the participant again 
resumed work on the itinerary for seven more minutes, 
when the CEO sent another IM requesting statistics about 
the incidence of the flu during 2005 and 2006, in order to 
help him decide whether to pay for employee flu shots. 
After this, the participant returned again to the itinerary task 
for one more minute, after which point the experimenter 
asked him to stop. To minimize user frustration and fatigue, 
if the participant took longer than seven minutes on any of 
the interrupting tasks, the CEO sent a follow-up IM asking 
for the best URL the participant had found so far, and then 
telling him or her to return to the travel itinerary task.
Participants then completed a questionnaire soliciting 
demographic information, information about their search 
habits, information about the session’s tasks and the 
strategies employed by the participant, and feedback on the 
SearchBar tool (experimental condition only). After each 
participant left, the experimenter saved all state, including 
the browser’s bookmarks and history, SearchBar data files, 
the itinerary document, and any additional digital or paper 
notes taken by the participant. Note that all participants 
used separate accounts on the study machine, so that the 
history, bookmarks, etc. in the Web browser reflected only 
their own actions and not those of other participants.
When participants arrived for the second session, one week 
later1, the setup was the same as the first week’s. Internet 
Explorer retained any settings they had accrued during the 
first session (bookmarks, history, SearchBar entries, etc.). 
Any digital notes they saved in other documents were still 
on the computer, and any paper notes they took were on the 
desk, along with the printout of the CEO’s travel requests. 
However, the travel itinerary document was the blank 
template from the first session, containing none of the 
content they had added the first week.
Participants were told they would reprise their role as 
assistant to the CEO, who wanted his travel itinerary
1 Three participants (all in the experimental condition) 
deviated from this one-week gap between sessions, 
returning after 6 days, 8 days, and 13 days respectively.
1211
