CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Table 3. Experimental group’s median Likert-scale ratings of the
SearchBar tool after the first and second sessions.
	Week	Week
	1	2
It was easy to learn how to use SearchBar.	4.5	N/A
The organization by topics was helpful.	4	4.5
The per-topic summaries were helpful.	4	4
SearchBar	was	useful	for	accomplishing	3.5	5
today’s tasks.		
The “thumbs up” feature was helpful.	3.5	3.5
The ability to take notes using SearchBar was helpful.	3	3
SearchBar took up too much space in my browser window.	2	2
SearchBar was confusing to use.	1.5	1.5
It was difficult to remember to create a new topic.	4	4
It	was	easy	to	remember	how	to	use	N/A	5
SearchBar.		
SearchBar helped me	remember what I	N/A	5
accomplished last week.		
SearchBar made it easy to re-find information about cameras, restaurants, and flu vaccines that I had encountered last week.	N/A	4.5
organizational structure, the thumbs up feature, and the 
summaries were seen as the most useful aspects of the tool; 
the note-taking feature was less popular. Log file analysis 
shows that participants indeed used the “thumbs up” feature 
frequently, marking a mean of 8.25 pages each with a 
thumbs up during the study.
However, some participants stated that it was difficult to 
remember to create a new topic before beginning a search 
task. Log file analysis shows that participants did take the 
time to create topics, creating a mean of 2.0 topics each 
during the study. However, this average number of topics is 
lower than the number of tasks completed, reflecting the 
fact that participants used other methods, primarily the 
maintenance of multiple tabs in their browsers, for 
separating tasks during short-term interruptions and multi-
tasking. Two of the eight experimental participants created 
six topics each, while three did not create any topics; this 
variance is not surprising given our survey findings 
showing that people differ in whether they use active or 
passive storage strategies during Web investigations. 
However, even those who utilized a more passive approach 
and didn’t take time to create their own topics still benefited 
from SearchBar’s proactive capture and automatically- 
imposed query/navigation structure.
DISCUSSION
The results presented in the previous section confirm that 
SearchBar is intuitive and easy to use. Although they were 
not explicitly required to use SearchBar during our study, 
participants made extensive use of SearchBar for re- 
executing queries and re-visiting Web pages and appeared
to integrate SearchBar into their workflow thoroughly and 
immediately. Questionnaire results also support this notion; 
participants indicated that SearchBar was easy to learn and 
easy to remember to use a week later. Perhaps most 
importantly, participants indicated that SearchBar was 
useful in accomplishing search tasks, particularly when 
resuming a task after a long interruption.
One of the major drawbacks of SearchBar is the need to 
create topics manually. Questionnaire results confirmed that 
participants found it difficult to remember to create a new 
topic when initiating a new task, although several 
participants did use this feature. The need to create new 
topics before beginning a search task is reduced 
significantly by the ability to create topics after the fact and 
move existing queries into the new topic; this is likely to be 
particularly common in long-term, real-world use, where 
users may begin a search task expecting to use only a small 
set of queries and later see that task evolve into a larger 
investigation. Note that topic creation is not always 
necessary: for smaller tasks, the automatic insertion of 
search queries into the “Default” topic often suffices, and 
will still provide SearchBar’s query-centric Web history 
and representation of query iteration. Automatic creation of 
new topics based on lexical, semantic, or temporal 
relationships among queries remains as future work.
Furthermore, SearchBar presently tracks only browsing 
sequences which begin with a search query, when in fact 
other browsing mechanisms, such as directly typing URLs 
into a browser, could also be used to continue a search, 
even without an intervening query. More sophisticated 
mechanisms for associating continued browsing with recent 
queries thus remain an important topic of future work; such 
mechanisms might be based on semantic similarity between 
a page and a recent query or temporal proximity between a 
navigation event and a recent query.
A longitudinal study assessing SearchBar’s scalability over 
time was beyond the scope of the present evaluation. The 
history and bookmarking systems in current browsers, for 
example, typically become cluttered as a result of long-term 
use. However, we aimed to make SearchBar more scalable 
than current history tools by:
(a) Using a hierarchical model centered around elements 
(topics and queries) that are meaningful to the user, 
which allows a user to browse a dense hierarchy more 
efficiently than a date- or site-based hierarchy.
(b) Enabling rating-based filtering of the history.
(c) Highlighting a past topic if a query contained by that 
topic is performed again later, thereby alleviating the 
need to manually explore the hierarchy in many cases.
In addition to studying the utility and usability of 
SearchBar, our study allowed us to explore the mechanisms 
used by both experimental and control participants to 
conduct search tasks and to manage search tasks across 
interruptions. One particularly surprising result was the
1214
