CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
the five people who used history, three had difficulty 
finding it (two had to use the browser’s “help” facility to 
locate the history, and one requested assistance from the 
experimenters in locating it).
Impact on Task Resumption
Participants’ feedback indicated that SearchBar made it 
easier to re-find information during the second session, with 
less redundant work. Participants using SearchBar reported 
significantly more agreement with the statement “It was 
easy to faithfully reproduce deleted portions of the travel 
itinerary” (median = 4.0) than those in the control condition 
(median = 2.5) (z = -1.93, p = .05). SearchBar users also 
reported significantly less agreement with the statement “I 
repeated a lot of work that I had done last week in order to 
re-find relevant information” (median = 2.0) than those in 
the control condition (median = 4.0) (z = -3.07, p &lt; .01). 
Also, for the “flu vaccine” task, which participants in both 
conditions rated as the most difficult of the tasks they 
performed, participants using SearchBar agreed 
significantly more that “It was easy to find information that
I encountered last week about the flu vaccine” (median = 
4.5) than those in the control condition (median = 2.0) (z = 
-2.28, p &lt; .03).
Analysis of the experimental group’s log files support 
participants’ perceptions that SearchBar assisted them in 
avoiding redundant work. Participants in the experimental 
condition clicked on queries and pages in the SearchBar to 
achieve 31.7% of re-querying actions and 31.5% of re- 
navigation actions, respectively. The value of SearchBar 
seemed more apparent to users during the second week of 
the study, when they relied on the tool for re-navigating 
significantly more (μ = 42.2% of re-navigations) than 
during the first week (μ = 23.5% of re-navigations) 
(z = 2.52, p &lt; .02) (mean numbers of re-navigations were 
37 and 41.5, respectively). The remainder of re-navigation 
events were initiated by other in-browser mechanisms, such 
as auto-completion of URLs or following previously- 
followed links. Similarly, in the first week of the study, all 
sixteen participants opened a new browser tab to initiate a 
new search task at least once during the course of the 
session. However, in the second week this behavior was 
primarily observed among control-condition participants: 
six control-condition participants and only one 
experimental-condition participant (z = -2.44, p &lt; .02). We 
hypothesize that this difference can be attributed to the 
availability of SearchBar, namely that the persistent state 
provided by SearchBar enabled experimental-condition 
participants to multi-task without opening additional tabs 
(which was a common strategy among control-condition 
participants for maintaining persistent state).
In both conditions, participants performed similarly in 
terms of their abilities to faithfully reproduce the contents 
of the deleted travel itinerary, accurately reproducing, on 
average, 74.7% of their entries (4.9 entries) from week 1 in 
the control group and 74.0% in the experimental (4.5
entries).3 However, participants using SearchBar made 
more progress on adding new content to the itinerary in 
addition to completing the reproduction of week one’s 
entries4; participants in the control condition completed a 
mean of 2.0 extra itinerary items, while SearchBar 
participants completed a mean of 3.75 extra entries. Note 
that, while this trend suggests that SearchBar helped 
participants re-find content more effectively than status-quo 
tools, this difference is not statistically significant. 
However, participants’ abilities to successfully re-find 
information in the control condition was likely artificially 
inflated by the study design – because the participants’ 
computer accounts were used only during the study sessions 
themselves, their browser histories were relatively short and 
uncluttered with pages from other intervening tasks, making 
the history a much simpler and, likely, more usable re- 
finding tool than it would be in an ecologically valid 
setting.
Experimental participants’ questionnaire responses after the 
second session (Table 3) show that they agreed strongly 
that SearchBar helped them remember what they had 
accomplished during the first week and made it easier to re- 
find relevant information about the CEO’s interrupting 
requests.
SearchBar Usability
Table 3 shows experimental participants’ Likert-scale 
ratings of the usability of SearchBar’s features, after both 
the first and second session. Participants gave high overall 
ratings to SearchBar’s usability, indicating agreement that it 
was easy to learn and remember how to use SearchBar. 
Although participants rated SearchBar as only moderately 
useful during the first week (median = 3.5), when they were 
able to use open tabs to maintain the context of interrupted 
tasks, the utility rating increased dramatically the second 
week (median = 5) (z = -1.91, p = .05), indicating that 
SearchBar was highly valued for resuming longer-term 
suspended tasks where it was not possible to maintain 
context via unchanging browser state.
Participants did not mind the screen real-estate devoted to 
SearchBar, indicating disagreement with the statement that 
it took up too much space in the browser window, even 
during the first week when it was less heavily utilized. 
Participants also indicated that they would use SearchBar 
both at home and at work, indicating on average that they 
would likely use it between one and multiple times per day 
in each setting. The ability to utilize topics as an
3 Note that one control-group participant’s week 1 itinerary 
was corrupted; only the remaining 15 participants’ data was 
considered in the comparison of week 1 and 2 itineraries.
4 We use itinerary items completed as a proxy for 
efficiency, since timing data was difficult to accurately 
measure because several participants completed portions of 
the itinerary out of order, mixing their re-creation of old 
content with their addition of new content.
1213
