CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
finished. Each participant was told that the computer was in 
the same state in which he had left it the previous week, 
except that a computer virus had destroyed the itinerary file. 
Participants were instructed to recreate the missing contents 
of the itinerary to the best of their ability, and, when they 
had finished doing so, to continue completing the itinerary 
by filling in the portions they had not had time to attend to 
the first week. Note that the itinerary task was refined 
through pilot testing to be long enough such that no 
participant completed the entire itinerary during either week 
of the study. Participants were also told that the CEO might 
still IM them if more pressing tasks arose. For the 
experimental condition, a printed copy of the SearchBar 
tutorial was available on the desk for reference.
Once again, the experimenter sent instant messages from 
the “CEO” to the participant after seven minute intervals of 
working on the travel itinerary task. This time, each of the 
three instant messages solicited information that depended 
on content found the first week: the name of a hotel located 
near the recommended pizza restaurant, the name of a store 
selling the recommended camera for a good price, and a 
comparison of the 2005-2006 flu incidence with that of 
prior years. Note that in each case, any specific information 
supplied by the participant to the experimenter the previous 
week, such as the camera model the participant had 
originally recommended, was not provided in the instant 
message; rather, we were interested in observing how easily 
participants could re-find this information.
As in the first session, after the participant responded to the 
final IM and had resumed work on the travel itinerary for 
one more minute, the experimenter stopped the session and 
distributed a second questionnaire, which solicited feedback 
on that session’s tasks and the strategies employed, and also 
on the SearchBar tool itself (experimental condition only).
Data gathered during the study included notes and 
observations from two experimenters who observed each 
session, questionnaires completed after each session, the 
itinerary documents from each of the two sessions, the 
transcripts of the instant messages, an enhanced browser 
history that included all navigations, window management 
events, and keyboard/mouse events, the browser’s 
bookmark lists, and any other digital or paper notes taken 
by participants. For participants in the experimental 
condition, we also logged the contents of the SearchBar and 
all interactions with the SearchBar, including passive 
interactions (insertion of new queries) and active 
interactions (clicking on results, creating topics, etc.).
RESULTS
Motivating Trends
At the end of the first session, we asked several questions 
about participants’ general search habits, which 
reconfirmed the motivations behind the creation of the
SearchBar prototype 2. The majority of participants reported 
that they have difficulty keeping track of information when 
conducting exploratory searches (median Likert response = 
4.0), that they enter the same query terms multiple times 
(median = 4.0), and that they do not always finish an 
exploratory or informational search task in one sitting 
(median = 4.0).
We also asked our sixteen participants the same survey 
questions about multi-session searches that we asked as part 
of our larger survey (see Introduction section). The 
response pattern observed in our questionnaire is very 
similar to that observed in our survey, which had targeted a 
more technical demographic, suggesting that our survey 
findings generalize beyond technical workers to more 
diverse gender, occupational, and technical skill 
backgrounds. 94% of our participants reported having 
engaged in multi-session searches, and 80% of those who 
had performed multi-session searches reported resumption 
gaps of a day or more, with 40% recalling occasions when a 
week or more passed before they resumed a suspended 
search task.
General Task Strategies
We observed several general trends in search strategies that 
were common across the majority of participants. The use 
of the Web browser’s tabs to assist with task management 
was one salient trend. During the first session, all sixteen 
participants opened a new browser tab at least once when 
beginning a new task related to the CEO’s interruptions, 
and then returned to an old tab after finishing with the 
interrupting task.
The use of multiple search sources was another common 
trend we observed: 81% of participants used at least one 
vertical search engine (in addition to a general-purpose 
search engine) during the study, and 56% used two or more 
different general-purpose search engines. Overall, 88% of 
participants used multiple search engines at some point 
during the study.
Only two participants (both in the control condition) made 
bookmarks during the first week; these participants also 
accessed these bookmarks during the second session. 
However, only one of these participants made bookmarks 
relevant to the study tasks; the other used bookmarks only 
to mark two of his favorite search engine sites and to switch 
among those sites quickly.
Five participants (all in the control condition) used the 
browser’s history during the second session of the study. Of
2 Because our data is not normally distributed, all analyses 
use non-parametric tests. We use the Mann-Whitney U test 
for comparisons between the control and experimental 
groups, and the Wilcoxon test for comparisons of the 
experimental participants’ week 1 versus week 2 data. 
Likert scale responses are on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 = 
strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree.
1212
