CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
were not forced to use any particular action during the 
course of the obstacle course and were allowed to use any 
combination of actions they want. However, for the harder 
route, participants were forced to use rotation and strafing 
in addition to walking and turning in order to complete the 
obstacle course successfully. A dotted yellow line on the 
course (Figure 3) indicated the starting point of the strafing 
action. The solid yellow line indicated the starting point of 
the rotate right action. In order to finish this task, the 
participants were asked to complete the easier route first 
followed by the harder trail.
Before the start of the experiment, we reminded the 
participants to complete the obstacle course as fast as 
possible, and try to make as few errors as possible. An error 
in this task is defined as hitting obstacles, navigating the 
AIBO out of the route boundary or failure to perform 
required actions at the specified locations. If a participant 
navigated the AIBO out of the route boundary, then she/he 
had to navigate it back to the route and continue on. If a 
participant failed to perform the required action at certain 
locations during the trial the examiner had to physically 
move the AIBO back to that location and ask the participant 
to try again. This error correction mechanism could have 
introduced a variable amount of time into the task 
completion time depending on how fast the examiner 
moves the AIBO back to the right location. We emphasized 
the “penalizing” implications of this set of errors to 
participants and were pleasantly surprised to see that none 
of the experimental trials required the administrator to 
physically move the AIBO or to manually correct any out-
of-bound navigation errors.
Interaction Techniques
In this task, the function mapping for the Wiimote interface 
is presented in Figure 4 and the mapping for the keypad 
interface is presented in Figure 5. The gesture mapping for 
the Wiimote controller was developed based on horseback 
riding techniques metaphor. The participants were told to 
think of the pair of Wiimotes as a neck rein on the AIBO. 
For instance, pulling both Wiimotes back will stop the 
AIBO; pulling the right Wiimote only will rotate the AIBO 
to the right, etc.
Due to the nature of the task, the gesture-to-robot action 
mapping is somewhat indirect. In this case, the participants 
are not controlling a single joint of the AIBO but rather the 
spatial kinematics of the robot when navigating it through 
the obstacle course. This implies a non-ideal “degree of 
integration”, and a weaker “degree of compatibility” [4] for the 
gesture-to-robot action mapping in this task. However, we can 
argue that the horseback riding metaphor provides efficient and 
intuitive mechanism for dealing with this abstract mapping.
The keypad-to-robot action mappings are: Forward – W + 
2, Stop – S + 5, Forward + Turning Left – A + 2, Forward + 
Turning right – W + 6, Strafe Left – A + 4, Strafe Right – D 
+ 6, Rotate Left – S + 2, and Rotate Right – W + 5. (the 
plus sign means pressing and holding the keys on both side 
of the sign).
The Data collected from this task was analyzed using a 2 x 
2 within-subjects ANOVA for the following factors:
•	Technique: Wiimote, Keypad
•	Difficulty: easy, hard.
Task 2 - Posture
Description
This task is used to examine the usability of both interaction 
techniques for low-level robot control. In this task, we 
asked the participants to perform twelve different postures 
with the forelegs of the AIBO. We displayed an image of 
the AIBO with a posture on a computer screen. Then the 
participants were asked to control the AIBO to imitate that 
posture. In the experiment setup, we have pre-defined four 
different postures for each foreleg of the AIBO. (Figure 6) 
We selected ten postures out of the sixteen possible 
combined postures using both forelegs. Then, we divided 
them into two groups of postures which can be chained 
together to create gesture sequences (Figure 9). The only 
difference between these groups of postures is that in order 
to transform from one posture to another within a group, the 
participants have to manipulate either one foreleg or both 
forelegs of the AIBO to complete the transition. We define 
the group of postures that require only one arm movement 
during the transition as the easier set, and the other group as 
the harder set. For the experiment, the participants were
Figure 4. The Wiimote interaction technique for
controlling the movement of the AIBO
Figure 3. The obstacle course
Figure 5. Key – Movement Mapping	Figure 6. The possible postures for each foreleg of the
AIBO
126
