CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
An Exploratory Study of Visual Information Analysis
Petra Isenberg	Anthony Tang	Sheelagh Carpendale
Dept. of Computer Science	HCT Lab	Dept. of Computer Science
University of Calgary	University of British Columbia	University of Calgary
Calgary, AB, Canada	Vancouver, BC, Canada	Calgary, AB, Canada
petra.isenberg@ucalgary.ca	tonyt@ece.ubc.ca	sheelagh@ucalgary.ca
ABSTRACT
To design information visualization tools for collaborative 
use, we need to understand how teams engage with visual-
izations during their information analysis process. We re-
port on an exploratory study of individuals, pairs, and triples 
engaged in information analysis tasks using paper-based vi-
sualizations. From our study results, we derive a framework 
that captures the analysis activities of co-located teams and 
individuals. Comparing this framework with existing mod-
els of the information analysis process suggests that informa-
tion visualization tools may benefit from providing a flexible 
temporal flow of analysis actions.
Author Keywords
Information Visualization, analysis process, collaboration.
ACM Classification Keywords 
[H.5.2]Information Interfaces and Presentation
INTRODUCTION
Interactive information visualization (infovis) tools are often 
the center of many complex information analysis tasks [20]. 
In everyday practice, data is frequently interpreted and an-
alyzed not only by individuals but by teams of individuals 
working in concert to make decisions. Imagine a team of 
geologists looking at test results to plan an upcoming expe-
dition, a group of city planners examining census data and its 
influence on future development, or a team of businessmen 
looking at current data and forecasts of their industry sec-
tor. While many researchers have explored the information 
analysis process (e. g. [3, 9, 16]), little has emerged on the na-
ture of this process in a collaborative context [10, 12]. How 
a single doctor would analyze biomedical visualizations, for 
example, might differ from how a team of doctors might ana-
lyze the same data. If teams make use of visual information 
to solve problems differently than individuals, we need to 
understand what these differences are so we can redesign in-
fovis tools to support their activity. To address this problem, 
we designed an exploratory study to understand the flow and
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior spe-
cific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04... $5.00.
nature of this collaborative process and its relation to indi-
vidual analysis practices. To derive practical guidelines for 
information visualization tool design, we focused on analyz-
ing how participants engage with the workspace and their 
collaborators. Teams in our study were given paper-based 
visualizations to solve tasks, allowing us to view their pro-
cess independently of the confounds of a specific infovis sys-
tem. The analytic framework that we have derived from our 
observations allows us to deconstruct and understand this vi-
sual information analysis process for the purpose of design, 
heuristic evaluation, and analysis of infovis tools.
Our work makes three primary contributions: we present an 
exploratory study to examine the information analysis pro-
cess for individuals and small groups in the context of visual 
data; second, we present an analytic framework that allows 
researchers to understand this analysis process in other con-
texts, and finally, we provide three concrete design implica-
tions for digital infovis tools derived from our findings.
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Collaborative Information Visualization Tools
Most collaborative information visualization systems have 
been developed for distributed data analysis: Many Eyes 
[21] and Swivel (http://www.swivel.com/) are two systems 
that are targeted at an internet-scale audience and both sup-
port asynchronous distributed collaborative sharing and ex-
ploration of data by letting users upload data, create visual-
izations, and comment on available visualizations. The Co- 
Motion environment has been used for information analysis 
and decision-support applications using shared views of the 
data on which all users can interact synchronously from re-
mote desktops [11]. A collaborative tree comparison system 
and a set of design guidelines for co-located data analysis 
has been presented in [8]. In relation to this work, our focus 
is to gain an understanding of the processes of co-located col-
laboration around information visualizations using a single 
shared workspace. This work particularly relates to previ-
ous studies that have also resulted in information processing 
frameworks as outlined in the next sections.
Collaborative Visual Information Processing
Both Park et al.’s study of pairs using distributed CAVE en-
vironments [12], and Mark et al.’s study of pairs sharing an 
infovis software tool that had been designed for single per-
son use [10], resulted in similar but not identical information
1217
