CHI 2008 Proceedings · Human-Robot Interaction	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Edition 2005. It supports both 802.11 a/b/g and Bluetooth 
network standards. The input devices on the OQO 02 
include a dedicated mouse, a backlit thumb keyboard with a 
total of 58 keys (including function keys, letter keys and a 
number pad) and a digital pen. The letter keys on the thumb 
keyboard follow the QWERTY keyboard layout. The OQO 
02 can be either powered by a removable lithium-ion 
polymer battery or an AC charger. For our comparative 
study we used the thumb keyboard only for controlling an 
AIBO.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
To compare and better understand how well people can 
learn and utilize the aforementioned techniques when 
controlling a robot, we designed an experimental test bed 
based on two tasks for comparing the techniques in terms of 
speed, accuracy and subjective preferences of the 
participants. Our goal was to explore the benefits and 
drawbacks associated with each interaction technique, and 
to try to point out which technique supports a more 
effective, intuitive and rich user experience when 
interacting with a robot.
Pilot Study
Before the full user study, we had conducted a pilot study to 
test the usability of both interaction techniques and the 
experiment fairness under different conditions. Our pilot 
study included 8 participants recruited from our lab. We 
found that our posture recognition technique does not suit 
well with people who have large body size. Thus, we 
changed our system to allow for a more flexible range of 
input. However, misrecognition still occurred during the 
pilot study. To minimize the impact of this problem on the 
participants’ task completion time, we modified the 
underlying software component that supports the interaction 
to automatically record the time when each posture 
command is triggered. The examiner also used the same 
software to manually log the time when a correct posture is 
preformed by pressing a button on a keyboard. A video tape 
recorder is used for backup purposes, capturing the entire 
experiment for replay and time synchronization purposes.
To enable participants to navigate the AIBO, we initially 
used the “W, A, S and D” key mapping on the OQO keypad 
for the navigation test. However, in this particular key 
arrangement, users only need to use their left thumb for 
most of the movements they need to perform. On the other 
hand, with the Wiimote technique, users have to use both 
hands with equal amount of effort to navigate the AIBO. To 
balance the single hand interaction technique with an 
asymmetric bimanual [2] interaction technique we revised 
the key mapping of the keypad interface (the revised 
mapping is explained in detail in the next section).
USER STUDY
Participants
For the comparative user study, we recruited twenty 
participants (16 males and 4 females) from the University 
of Calgary; each participant was paid $10 for taking part in 
the experiment. Ages ranged from 18 to 29 (M = 21.75, SD 
= 3.05). All of the participants reported to use computer
keyboard everyday. Among all of the participants, eighteen 
people were right-handed, one person was left-handed and 
one person was ambidextrous. All of the participants 
indicated that they have some sort of computer game 
experience. Fifteen participants reported to play computer 
games on a daily or weekly basis. Seventeen participants 
indicated that they “often” or “very often” use computer 
keyboard to play games. Six participants reported no prior 
experience playing the Nintendo Wii. Out of the fourteen 
people who had previous experience with the Wii only 
three participants reported to play it on a weekly basis. The 
other 11 indicated playing either “Monthly” or “Rarely”.
Task and Procedure
Our experiment was designed for two different tasks, 
robotic navigation and robotic posture, each with two 
difficulty levels. The participants were asked to perform 
both tasks with both interaction techniques. Thus, in total, 
participants had to go through four sub experiments in order 
to complete the study. The order of techniques was 
counterbalanced among participants by alternating the tasks 
order, thus ten participants started with the Wiimote 
Interface and ten participants started with the OQO 
interface. The experiment was conducted following a 
written protocol. Participants were asked to start with one 
interaction technique to complete both navigation and 
posture tasks and then switch to the other technique and 
repeat the two tasks. During the experiment, each 
participant was asked to complete four sets of 
questionnaires after each trial and, once finished, to 
complete a post-study questionnaire which was followed up 
with a non-structured interview. Each study took around 60 
min. to complete.
To allow participants to learn and practice each interaction 
technique and to familiarize themselves with the tasks a 
practice trial was administrated before the full experiment 
started. The administrator demonstrated the interaction 
techniques and presented guidelines on how to complete the 
tasks. Then, the participants would try out the interaction 
technique until they felt proficient and comfortable to move 
on.
The main dependent measure in the experiment was the 
task completion time. In addition, we recorded the number 
of errors that the participants made with each interaction 
technique.
Task 1 – Navigation
Description
In this task, the participants were asked to navigate the 
AIBO through an obstacle course (Figure 3). The obstacle 
course is 262 cm in length and 15.3 cm in width. The goal 
of this test is to see how well both interaction techniques 
support user control in a fairly delicate robotic navigation 
task. We provided the user with eight different navigation 
control actions: walk forward, stop, walk forward while 
turning left, walk forward while turning right, rotate left, 
rotate right, strafe left and strafe right.
To motivate the participants to use all actions, we designed 
two routes for the task. For the easier route, participants
125
