CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
another blunt instrument incident,” or “How do we connect 
these cases?” Discussion of the Raffield homicide was 
coded if the IM line referenced any person related to the 
Raffield homicide or if the line clearly showed them 
thinking about facts relating to the case, for example, “what 
did Darlene Raffield’s boss say?” Because a single IM 
conversation line could be affiliated with both the Raffield 
homicide and the serial killer task, these counts were not 
mutually exclusive. For example, some participants 
discussed whether the Raffield homicide was connected to 
the serial killer task. References to the social network 
diagram were coded if the IM line directly referenced the 
diagram, for example, if participants used words such as 
“diagram,” “visualization,” and “picture,” or discussed their 
active search within the diagram, such as “Watch this” and 
“See how these pop out?” The percentage of total IM lines 
during which IM lines referenced the visualization was 
calculated and log transformed. Over 5,000 lines of IM 
were coded using the scheme. An independent coder coded 
7% of the data (Kappa = .76).
RESULTS
We obtained data from 47 pairs (94 participants), 13 pairs 
in the No Visualization condition, 10 pairs in the Unshared 
Visualizations condition, 12 pairs in the Shared View-Only 
Visualizations condition, and 12 pairs in the Shared Full- 
Access Visualization condition.
Preliminary Analyses
To insure the task was equally difficult and enjoyable 
across conditions we administered the NASA TLX 
workload scale [12], CRT Scales [10], and measured task 
enjoyment on the posttest. Mean scores did not differ by 
condition, suggesting that cognitive ability, cognitive load, 
and enjoyment were equal across conditions. To insure that 
correctly identifying the serial killer reflected comparable 
insight across conditions, on the posttest survey we tested 
participant’s recognition memory for the eight pieces of 
evidence leading to a serial killer (multiple choice 
questions). Again, there were no differences across 
conditions.
Table 1 shows the correlations of measures on the pairs. 
These allow us to examine across all conditions whether 
visualization-related communication is associated with 
collaborative success. The table shows that, overall, when 
pairs identified the serial killer, they also had 
communicated more about the serial killer and talked more 
about the visualization. Active use of the visualization tool 
was not directly associated with communication; this result 
could be due to partners’ opening their visualization 
window once and then moving to talk and to view 
documents.
Individual and Collaborative Performance
We first examined performance on the simple problem— 
the Raffield homicide. We did not ask pairs to solve this 
case, but about one-third of the pairs did so anyway. We 
believe they did so in part because it was an easy way to get 
something done when the pair had trouble identifying the
serial killer. Consistent with this argument, the correlation 
between identifying the serial killer and solving the Raffield 
homicide was r = -.20. There were no differences across 
conditions solving the Raffield homicide, suggesting that 
having a visualization tool does not influence performance 
on a simple problem.
We next examined individual performance on the serial 
killer case. According to our arguments, if visualization 
improves individual performance then that improvement 
might translate into a greater likelihood of collaborative 
success. Because the dependent variable, solving the serial 
killer, is a discrete variable, the appropriate analysis is a 
logistic regression [16]. This regression assesses whether 
visualization conditions predict the dichotomous outcome 
(identified the serial killer or not). The logistic regression 
analyses at the individual level showed a highly significant 
influence of condition on whether individuals identified the 
serial killer (logistic regression Likelihood Ratio x2 = 12.1, 
p &lt; .01, df = 3, 93) with the No Visualization condition 
different from the other conditions (x2 = 5.75, p = .01).
We predicted in Hypothesis 1 that using a visualization tool 
would increase collaborative performance over 
performance in the control condition. We defined 
collaborative success when both members of the pair 
reached consensus and correctly identified the serial killer. 
We conducted analyses at the pair level, whose results are 
shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Percent of pairs solving the serial killer task by
condition.
Pairs in all three visualization conditions outperformed 
pairs in the No Visualization condition, as predicted. Only 
7.7% (SE = 12.7) of pairs in the No Visualization condition 
identified the serial killer, whereas 50% (SE = 14.5) of pairs 
in the Unshared Visualization condition, 33.3% (SE = 13.2) 
of pairs in the Shared View Only Visualization condition, 
and 58% (SE = 13.2) of pairs in the Shared Full Access 
Visualization condition identified the serial killer (logistic 
regression Likelihood Ratio x2 = 9, p &lt; .05, df = 3, 46). 
Student’s t tests revealed significant differences at the p &lt;
100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0	
No Vis. Unshared Shared Shared Full 
Vis.	View Only Access Vis.
Vis.
Visualization Condition
1232
