CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Figure 6. The Aruvi prototype. The alphabet labels describe the interaction interfaces of the prototype explained in the Prototype section. The 
numeric labels are used to describe an analysis process presented in the Use Case section.
of the objects does not change when the data mapping is 
changed by changing the axes or size. Hence, it is possible 
to track or emphasize the interesting objects during the en-
tire exploration process. The three levels of DOI facilitate 
convergent analysis. However, the analyst can revert back 
to a previous DOI of the objects using the history tracking 
mechanism and continue the analysis with different DOIs for 
the objects. Hence, divergent analysis is also supported.
The analyst can choose to show or hide the low DOI objects 
via the show only filtered data interface (see figure 6(c)). The 
current selection interface (see figure 6(q)) displays the list 
of objects with high DOI. When there is no selection, it dis-
plays the list of objects with medium DOI. The object list in 
the current selection interface can be added as a note in the 
knowledge view using the paste as new note interface (see 
figure 6(r)). The scatterplot allows zoom-in to a particular 
region of the scatterplot via the Zoom in interface (see fig-
ure 6(e)). The settings interface (see figure 6(b)) toggles the 
display of the size and show only filtered data interfaces. An 
information bar interface (see figure 6(f)) is used to display 
details about the selection and size encoding. Finally, the 
analyst can save, reopen or recover the last analysis using a 
file menu (see figure 6(a)).
History Tracking
The granularity of the history tracking can be chosen in vari-
ous ways. For instance, all changes to the visualization spec-
ification can be captured. However, some heuristics on spec-
ification change detection can be applied to avoid too much 
low level detail. For instance, when the user continuously 
changes the filter in the dynamic query interface, the changes 
are reflected in the visualization (scatterplot) but are not cap-
tured by the history tracking module. We found it to be con-
venient just to capture the visualization state when the mouse 
pointer leaves the dynamic query interface and if atleast one 
of the filters has been changed. Other heuristics, like detec-
tion of (not necessarily continuous) change patterns could be 
used and will be studied in the future. The base model itself 
does allow for a variety of choices here.
USE CASE
We now present a simple use case where a user explores a 
digital camera dataset (565 cameras with 15 attributes) us-
ing the Aruvi prototype. There are a several tasks that the 
user might perform with the data, such as detecting trends 
and finding cameras that meet user requirements. To per-
form trend analysis, the user compares the digital camera 
attributes for different years. The user uses the scatterplot in 
the data view for this comparison.
The user records the findings in the knowledge view using 
a mind map. The mind map is a diagram used to represent 
ideas linked to and arranged radially around a central idea 
[9]. The user records the central idea - trend analysis - in 
note 1 (see figure 6(1)). Firstly, the user plots the number
1242
