CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Often, the scientific data changes during analysis and the 
specifications of the visualization pipeline have to be tweaked 
for accurate results. VisTrails [4], a scientific visualization 
workflow system, allows the creation and maintenance of vi-
sualization pipelines, and optimizes their execution.
The models described above provide solutions for backtrack-
ing visualization states using history or workflow mecha-
nism. However, they do not enable the user to capture his 
reasoning while viewing the data.
Knowledge Externalization
The design of information visualization tools often ends af-
ter creating interactive visualizations to explore the data, and 
little support for information synthesis for analytical reason-
ing is offered. Sometimes, annotations are offered to identify 
interesting patterns or objects on the visualization. Anno-
tations can be attached to hand-drawn marks that are used 
to highlight interesting patterns or objects, for instance, en-
circling a region in the visualization. Denisovich [12] uses 
hand-drawn marks on top of a map to select objects, simi-
lar to lasso selection, and to attach annotations to them. The 
user can access the findings from the annotations list. Ellis 
and Groth [14] use annotations to share discoveries in their 
collaborative data visualization environment. The annota-
tions are stored in a separate layer on top of the data and 
enable expression of free thoughts. Often, annotations are 
used as attention pointers to the synthesized information. If 
the number of annotations on top of the visualization is large, 
it is difficult to express relations among the annotations.
In sense.us [18], a discussion forum is used to express opin-
ions on visualizations. The users can share their findings or 
free thoughts by starting a new thread or adding to an exist-
ing thread along with a link to the visualization. The threads 
within the discussion forum are independent and do not pro-
vide an overview of the causal links between the findings 
shared in the discussion forum. While performing complex 
analysis, it becomes difficult for the human working mem-
ory to maintain the causal link between various propositions 
in the discussion forum [5].
In Harvest [16], knowledge is synthesized as concept in-
stances. A concept is described using a data ontology based 
on type, parent type and user-defined attributes. The user 
can create a new concept or collect evidence to an exist-
ing concept. The concepts can be modified, merged, or re-
moved. The links between the concepts and evidence are 
maintained by the synthesis manager based on the data on-
tology. The synthesized knowledge is visualized using a 
graph-like structure in the synthesis space. Sandbox [37] al-
lows the user to jot down hypotheses, evidence using a white 
board metaphor within the TRIST framework [22]. It allows 
the analyst to save references to any relevant information in-
cluding documents, snippets, images, tables, etc. Concept 
maps are automatically generated by Sandbox based on the 
text-to-concept map algorithm. Jigsaw [31], a visual analyt-
ics system represents connections and relationships between 
entities in document collections.
APPROACH
Harvest and Sandbox offer support for evidence marshalling. 
However, they do not associate synthesized concept with any 
visualization. It is not possible to review the synthesized 
concept using the corresponding visualization that leads to 
the finding. Hence, they do not suffice the requirements for 
supporting the analytical reasoning process. To satisfy the 
requirements for the analytical reasoning process through 
information visualization, we argue that the user has to be 
provided with three different types of visual representations:
•	Data view: visual representation(s) of the data;
•	Navigation view: visual representation(s) of the explo-
ration process;
•	Knowledge view: visual representation(s) of the analysis 
artifacts and their causal links.
The data view consists of interactive information visualiza-
tion tools. The navigation view provides an overview of 
the exploration process by capturing the visualization states 
automatically. The knowledge view enables the users to 
record their analysis artifacts and the causal links between 
them. The users can also organize the analysis artifacts in the 
knowledge view to build a case to support or contradict an 
argument. The user can establish a link between an analysis 
artifact in the knowledge view and a visualization state in the 
navigation view. Hence, the user can revisit a visualization 
state from both navigation and knowledge views to review 
the analysis and to validate the findings. After revisiting 
the visualization state, the user can reuse it to look for alter-
nate views. Thus, the three phases of the analytical reason-
ing process (model construction, revision and falsification) 
are supported. This information visualization framework for 
supporting the analytical reasoning process is shown in (fig-
ure 1).
Figure 1. An information visualization framework for supporting the 
analytical reasoning process
The key feature in this framework is that it allows the user to 
establish a link between the externalized knowledge artifact 
in the knowledge view and a particular visualization state 
asynchronously. A visualization state can be associated with 
more than one analysis artifact in the knowledge view. In 
the following sections, we describe the components of the 
framework in detail.
Data View
The data view is a container for interactive information vi-
sualization tools to explore the data. It has two components: 
visual representations and interactions. Visual representa-
tions can vary from a single visualization to multiple visual-
izations depending on the nature of the data and the analysis.
1239
