CHI 2008 Proceedings · Visualization to Support Information Work	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
Supporting the Analytical Reasoning Process in
Information Visualization
Yedendra B. Shrinivasan
Dept. Mathematics and Computer Science
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven
y.b.shrinivasan@tue.nl
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a new information visualization frame-
work that supports the analytical reasoning process. It con-
sists of three views - a data view, a knowledge view and 
a navigation view. The data view offers interactive informa-
tion visualization tools. The knowledge view enables the an-
alyst to record analysis artifacts such as findings, hypotheses 
and so on. The navigation view provides an overview of the 
exploration process by capturing the visualization states au-
tomatically. An analysis artifact recorded in the knowledge 
view can be linked to a visualization state in the navigation 
view. The analyst can revisit a visualization state from both 
the navigation and knowledge views to review the analysis 
and reuse it to look for alternate views. The whole analysis 
process can be saved along with the synthesized information. 
We present a user study and discuss the perceived usefulness 
of a prototype based on this framework that we have devel-
oped.
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Inter-
faces Graphical User Interfaces (GUI);
Author Keywords
Visual analytics, analytical reasoning process, information 
visualization
INTRODUCTION
Information visualization helps to understand data using in-
teractive abstract visual representations [10]. Interactive ex-
ploration of the data can lead to many discoveries in terms 
of relations, patterns, outliers and so on. It is difficult for 
the human working memory to keep track of all findings. 
Hence, synthesis of many different findings and relations 
between those findings increase the cognitive overload [27] 
and thereby hinders the reasoning process.
Visual analytics is the science of analytical reasoning facili-
tated by interactive visual interfaces [32]. It combines tech-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2008, April 5 - 10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00
Jarke J. van Wijk
Dept. Mathematics and Computer Science
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven
vanwijk@win.tue.nl
niques from information visualization and computational data 
analysis to support the analytical reasoning process. The 
grand challenge in the visual analytics research agenda [32] 
calls for developing information visualization to perform data 
analysis as well as structured reasoning. This includes the 
construction of arguments, convergent-divergent investiga-
tion and evaluation of alternative hypotheses. In this way, 
sensemaking is facilitated.
Sensemaking involves seeking information, organizing and 
analyzing it, and possibly forming new knowledge and in-
forming further action [10]. Pirolli and Card [27] organize 
the sensemaking process of an analyst into two major loops: 
the information foraging loop and the sensemaking loop. 
The information foraging loop involves organizing informa-
tion into some schema [26]. The sensemaking loop involves 
development of a mental model from the schema to support 
or contradict the claims [29]. They found that for effective 
analytical reasoning, analysts opportunistically mix the two 
loop. In practice, the support of information visualization 
tools for the sensemaking process is limited to the informa-
tion foraging loop, and the sensemaking loop has to be done 
in the analyst’s mind.
In this paper, we present a new information visualization 
framework that supports the analytical reasoning process. 
We first consider analytical reasoning in general and in com-
bination with visualization, and derive requirements from 
this. Next, we present our solution, which consists of a com-
bination of three views - a data view, a knowledge view and 
a navigation view. The data view offers interactive infor-
mation visualization tools. The knowledge view enables an 
analyst to record the analysis artifacts. The navigation view 
provides an overview of the exploration process by capturing 
visualization states automatically and presenting them to the 
user. We argue that by using this information visualization 
framework the analyst can review the analysis, validate the 
findings and revise them. The analyst can also organize the 
findings in the knowledge view to build a case. The whole 
analysis process can be saved and presented to others along 
with the findings. To support this argument, we present a 
user study and discuss the perceived usefulness of a proto-
type based on this framework that we have developed.
ANALYTICAL REASONING IN INFOVIS
The analytical reasoning process is often not a systematic 
process. Information foraging in information visualization 
can be described as navigation through an information space
1237
