# Para 0 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 1 1
Exploring the Role of the Reader in the Activity of
# Para 2 1
Blogging
# Para 3 1
Eric Baumer	Mark Sueyoshi	Bill Tomlinson
# Para 4 1
Department of Informatics	Int’l Studies / East Asian Cultures	Department of Informatics
# Para 5 1
U of California, Irvine, USA	U of California, Irvine, USA	U of California, Irvine, USA
# Para 6 1
ebaumer@ics.uci.edu	msueyosh@uci.edu	wmt@uci.edu
# Para 7 1
ABSTRACT
# Para 8 17
Within the last decade, blogs have become an important 
element of popular culture, mass media, and the daily lives 
of countless Internet users. Despite the medium’s 
interactive nature, most research on blogs focuses on either 
the blog itself or the blogger, rarely if at all focusing on the 
reader’s impact. In order to gain a better understanding of 
the social practice of blogging, we must take into account 
the role, contributions, and significance of the reader. This 
paper presents the findings of a qualitative study of blog 
readers, including common blog reading practices, some of 
the dimensions along which reading practices vary, 
relationships between identity presentation and perception, 
the interpretation of temporality, and the ways in which 
readers feel that they are a part of the blogs they read. It 
also describes similarities to, and discrepancies with, 
previous work, and suggests a number of directions and 
implications for future work on blogging.
# Para 25 2
Author Keywords 
Blogging, blog readers.
# Para 27 1
ACM Classification Keywords
# Para 28 3
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous; K.4.m. Computers and Society: 
Miscellaneous.
# Para 31 1
INTRODUCTION
# Para 32 7
By most indications, blogs are proliferating at an ever- 
increasing rate. Although specific figures vary among 
different sources [16,25] there is consensus that blogs have 
become an important, active, and influential part of online 
media. Research on blogging, e.g., [11,15,21], has revealed 
important insights about the activity of blogging, the 
attitudes of bloggers, and the practices surrounding blogs.
# Para 39 2
However, blogging is not a solo activity. While work has 
been done in areas such as analyzing conversations between
# Para 41 6
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
# Para 47 1
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
# Para 48 1
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00. 
# Para 49 14
blogs, e.g., [7,10], and applying social network analysis to 
blogs, e.g., [8,19], little work has been done examining the 
role of the reader in the blogging process. This gap is 
surprising, considering Nardi et al.’s prediction that “future 
research is sure to pay attention to blog readers” [21:231]. 
Furthermore, according to Lenhart and Fox [16], as of July 
2006, 57 million American adults read blogs, over a third of 
the 147 million who use the Internet. Sifry [25] puts the 
number of unique Technorati visitors at over 9 million in 
March 2007, up by over 50% from February 2007. Clearly, 
not only is the number of blogs increasing, but also the 
number of blog readers. The role of this ever increasing 
population of blog readers presents a promising and 
important, yet little-explored, area of research.
# Para 63 31
This paper is not the first call for a focus on readers. In the 
1960’s and 1970’s, a shift occurred in literary theory from 
focusing primarily on the literary object itself to including 
the reader’s response to the literature. Reader-response 
theory, or reader-response criticism, cf. [3,17], focuses not 
on the literature itself but rather on the audience’s response 
to, and interpretation of, the text. The reader is not a passive 
recipient of content, this critique argues, but rather engages 
in an active process of interpretation. Reality and meaning 
exist neither solely in the text nor solely in the reader, but 
are constructed through the dialectic interactions between 
the two. Similarly, the reality and meaning of a blog exists 
neither solely in the blog itself nor solely in the reader, but 
rather in the reader’s active interpretation of, and 
interaction with, the blog. Furthermore, technologies and 
practices such as commenting, linking, tagging, and 
trackbacks enable a level of explicit interaction with both 
the text and the author not available in previous textual 
media. This paper argues for a shift in the study of blogging 
similar to that in literary criticism represented by reader- 
response theory. This shift to emphasize the interactional 
aspects of blogging also fits into a larger trend in HCI 
research of moving from the user as information processor, 
to human actor, to embodied experiencer [5]. In order to 
understand the myriad contexts in which human-computer 
interaction takes place, researchers have adopted different 
stances toward users and taken different perspectives on 
HCI systems. Similarly, in order to understand fully the 
activity of blogging, we must study not only bloggers and 
the blogs they produce, but also the readers of those blogs 
and their interactions with the blog and the blogger.
# Para 94 1
1111
# Para 95 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 96 10
This paper reports on the results of a qualitative study into 
the practices and culture of blog readers. How do readers 
contribute to and help shape the various blogs they read? 
When, why, and how do readers choose to comment? How 
do readers perceive the identity of the blogger? Do readers 
feel overwhelmed by the amount of information available 
through blogs? What habits do readers follow? While this 
paper cannot address these questions in their entirety, it is a 
first step toward understanding the role, contributions, and 
significance of the reader in the activity of blogging.
# Para 106 1
RELATED WORK
# Para 107 18
Recent work on blogging covers a wide range of topics (see 
[24] for an overview). This section highlights work that 
helps inform this study. Nardi [21] examined the social 
nature of blogging activity, illustrating that blogs are quite 
unlike a personal diary. Lenhart’s [15] work pointed to the 
slow development of norms given the decentralized and 
non-standardized activities that occur on and off blogs. 
Herring et al. [11] provide a genre analysis of weblogs. 
Within the emerging medium of blogs, boyd [1] addressed 
the need for self-awareness tools to manage the fluidity of 
identity presentation in blogs. Some have applied existing 
analytic tools, such as social network analysis, e.g., [8, 19], 
to show that blogs are not highly interconnected in a 
decentralized fashion, but rather grouped in numerous 
clusters of blogs with limited links between clusters. 
Studies using conversation analysis have suggested that 
conversations across blogs and amongst bloggers are 
limited to a small number of “A-list” blogs [10].
# Para 125 14
Here, our focus is the audience. In Lenhart’s examination of 
norm formation in blogging [15], she discusses the 
anonymity of the blog audience and their occasional 
terrifying effect on bloggers. Similarly, Reed [23] illustrates 
blogger self-censorship due to an audience made up of 
certain friends and family. boyd [2] describes the 
expectations that bloggers feel are placed on them by their 
audience and how bloggers negotiate the formation and 
fulfillment of these expectations. Nardi suggests that 
“readers create blogs as much as writers” [21:225], giving 
them an equal role in the activity of blogging. Despite 
acknowledging the presence and impact of an audience, no 
previous blogging research has made blog readers the 
primary focus. This paper aims to fill that gap.
# Para 139 12
The position of the blog reader is often an ambiguous one. 
Most research on blogs adopts the view that readers, 
commenters, and participants are also bloggers themselves, 
e.g., [8]. However, according to the statistics cited above, 
there is obviously a large discrepancy between bloggers and 
people who read blogs – not every reader is a blogger. The 
question becomes, when does one move from being a blog 
reader to a blogger? Is simply owning a blog enough, or 
must there be regular updates? What is the requisite update 
frequency? Despite indications to the contrary, are there 
any bloggers who do not read other blogs? It is be argued 
below that, rather than attempting to split individuals into
# Para 151 7
either the category of blogger or the category of reader, it 
might be more useful to consider the question in terms of 
degree of membership, where an individual may be both a 
blogger and a reader to varying and independent degrees. 
For the purposes of this study, we focus on those who have 
a high enough degree of readership to self-identify as a blog 
reader, regardless of their degree of bloggership.
# Para 158 1
THEORY
# Para 159 7
In examining the activities that surround blog reading, this 
study is partially informed by ideas from reader-response 
theory [3,17], which help provide a general framework with 
which to analyze the act of reading blogs. This section 
provides a brief introduction to reader-response theory, 
situating it in the context of literary criticism, and describes 
how the theory is applied in this paper.
# Para 166 10
Despite the general inclination to situate reader-response 
theory in opposition to formalism, which posits that only 
the materiality of the text is significant, it actually 
developed from within formalism itself (Tompkins, cited in 
[3]). In the 1950’s, reader-response theory branched out 
from formalist discourse under the auspices of Gibson’s 
“mock reader” – the persona a reader should adopt to 
understand the text [3]. Thus a slight variation within 
formalism became the seed from which the reader and her 
or his interpretation gained significance.
# Para 176 26
Later reader-response theorists, such as Crosman [3], 
argued specifically that the “construction of meaning 
ultimately resides in the auspices of readers, who approach 
literary texts... from their own subjective perspectives” 
[3:66]. This view is reminiscent of Nardi et al.’s [21] 
assertion that the reader and writer both participate in co- 
creating the blog, as well as Dourish’s [5] emphasis on 
viewing the user as a situated, embodied actor that actively 
engages with a system in context. As an extension of 
Crosman’s approach, Lewis [17] presents an alternate 
method of performing a literary critique. He suggests rather 
than judging books as good or bad and making assertions 
about someone’s tastes based on the books he or she reads, 
“let us try to discover how far it might be plausible to 
define a good book as a book which is read in one way, and 
a bad book as a book which is read in another way” [16:1]. 
He argues that “good literature [is] that which permits, 
invites, or even compels good reading” [16:104], and that 
examining the type of reading that a given work permits, 
invites, or compels can tell you about the merits of that 
work. While there may be questions as to what constitutes 
good reading, the purpose at hand is not to separate good 
blogs from bad. Rather, it is to explore the extent to which 
we may understand a blog not by features of its content, 
structure, or technological aspects, but rather by the type of 
reading practices in which readers of the blog engage.
# Para 202 1
METHODS
# Para 203 2
The authors chose to employ qualitative and ethnographic 
methods in order to gain an understanding of the subjective
# Para 205 1
1112
# Para 206 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 207 14
experience of reading blogs. Participants were recruited 
through physical fliers posted on community bulletin 
boards and in public posting areas, as well as through 
online bulletin boards for the local community. The posted 
criteria were that respondents read at least 5 different blogs 
at least 2 to 3 times per week. In total, 23 individuals 
replied to these advertisements: 21 responded to the 
physical fliers, and 2 replied to the online postings. Of 
those, 19 fit our criteria (18 from the physical fliers and 1 
from the online postings). Some potential subjects decided 
not to participate or stopped responding, resulting in a total 
of 15 respondents. All participants were compensated up to 
$20 US depending on the extent of their participation. 
Participant names used in this paper are pseudonyms.
# Para 221 33
Three main data-gathering techniques were used: two semi- 
structured interviews with each participant, logging 
software to track reading patterns, and a survey to gather 
some basic data, such as demographics. Since there is little 
focus on blog readers in the existing literature, the first set 
of interviews were largely exploratory and generative; 
although there were specific themes on which this study 
was to focus, the first interview was also used to find other 
interesting themes or issues in our respondents’ blog 
reading practices. During the second interviews, 
participants were asked to discuss further some of the 
specific themes that emerged during the first round of 
interviews. Participants were also solicited to complete their 
second interview as a group interview. Four participants 
expressed interest in group interviews, but due to logistic 
constraints only one pair of participants completed the 
second interview as a group. One participant, Connie was 
unable to complete the second interview, and another, Jill, 
had to answer questions for the second interview via email. 
During both interviews, all participants spent time reading 
blogs as they normally would, showing and describing 
items of interest and parts of their blog-reading routines to 
the interviewer. All interviews and notes were transcribed 
and coded, initially using open coding and then 
transitioning to axial coding (see [18]). Coding was an 
iterative process during which two of the authors 
independently coded each interview transcript and then 
exchanged the transcripts to confer on the codes used and 
the themes they represented. The initial coding began after 
the completion of the first interviews, so that results from 
analysis of the first set of interviews helped inform and 
direct the second set. The axial codes form the basis for the 
findings reported below.
# Para 254 9
Participants were also asked to install logging software on 
their computers to track their blog reading. The logger was 
implemented as a plugin for IBM’s Web Intermediaries 
infrastructure [28], which recorded a series of time-stamped 
URLs. Unfortunately, most participants either elected not to 
install the logger or ran into technical difficulties. Since 
only five participants successfully ran the logger, an 
analysis of those logs is not presented here, but it was used 
to generate questions for some of the second interviews.
# Para 263 1
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
# Para 264 17
Table 1 presents a profile of our respondents. Because 
subjects were recruited from the geographical area around a 
university, many are students or recent graduates. That said, 
they represent a diverse set of blog reading habits and 
practices. The data presented in this table were collected 
through an online survey completed by all but one of the 
participants (Connie). “Regular blogs” is the number of 
blogs the participant reads on a regular basis as determined 
by the participant, “example blogs” are a selection of 
representative examples from the blogs she or he reads, and 
“tools” describes the technology the participant uses to find 
and to read blogs. Since the purpose of these data is not to 
make statistical inferences about blog readers but rather to 
help create a picture of the various participants, and since 
the sample is not sufficiently large to generate statistically 
significant results, no quantitative analysis is performed. 
For statistics about blog readers, see [16].
# Para 281 10
This section includes a description of blog reading practices 
that were common among most of our participants, along 
with some of the factors that influence the myriad 
differences in approaches to reading blogs. Drawing on this 
diversity in blog reading practices, the section then 
addresses the question “what is a blog?” from readers’ 
perspectives; discusses the presentation and perception of 
online identity, noting important similarities and differences 
with previous work; and describes ways in which readers 
can feel that they are “a part” of the blogs they read.
# Para 291 1
Common Blog Reading Practices
# Para 292 15
While reader-response theory helps make sense of the 
significant variations of the data, some aspects of our 
participants’ reading practices are fairly consistent. Thirteen 
explicitly stated that blog reading is a form of “chilling 
out”, “wasting time”, “brain candy”, or “doing nothing”, 
similar to the pottering activities described by Wyche et al. 
[27]. The other two later indicated on the survey that blog 
reading was “sometimes” an activity during periods of 
boredom. Similar to some instances of pottering, blog 
reading can also have a habitual nature. When Fern reads 
blogs, she adheres to a self-prescribed system, despite her 
lack of interest in the content of some posts she reads. 
Lillian indicated that reading blogs became part of her 
morning routine. When we asked Charles if he looked 
forward to reading blogs everyday he responded:
# Para 307 4
I don’t know if I look forward to [reading blogs]... I don’t 
really look forward to cigarettes anymore, but it’s something 
that happens through the course of the day that I feel like I 
might need to do. It just becomes habit, I guess.
# Para 311 7
Though in all likelihood most blog readers do not share 
Charles’s outlook on the intensity of blog reading’s 
addictiveness, blog reading often becomes habitual. For 
Krish, who has only been reading blogs for eight months, 
“checking blogs is like checking one’s email,” which is 
similar to the habitualness described by nine other 
participants. For many, checking email is a routine, almost
# Para 318 1
1113
# Para 319 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 320 17
Pseudonym	Age	Gender	Occupation	Regular Blogs	Frequency	Example Blogs	Years Reading	Tools
Connie	22	F	--	--	Every Day	--	--	--
Fern	19	F	Student	1-2	Every Other Day	xanga.com, blogspot.com, livejournal.com	5-6 Years	4, 5, AIM Profiles
Selena	18	F	Student	6-10	2-3 Times a Week	greatestjournal.com, myspace.com, xanga.com, asianave.com	6-7 Years	1, 4, 5
Charles	24	M	Admin. Assistant	6-10	Several Times a Day	dailykos.com, boingboing.net, blogspot.com, slashdot.org, poplicks.com	6-7 Years	1, 4
Lillian	33	F	Graduate Student	20+	Every Day	blogspot.com, indigirl.com/blog, carrieoke.net, doggedknits.com	4.5 Years	2
Judith	20	F	Student	3-5	Every Other Day	myspace.com, xanga.com, facebook.com	3 Years	4
Jill	20	F	Student	6-10	Several Times a Day	livejournal.com, flickfilosopher.com/blog, ingliseast.typepad.com/ingliseast	5-6 Years	1
Cindy	19	F	Student	1-2	Several Times a Day	xanga.com, livejournal.com	5 Years	4
Patricia	20	F	Student	1-2	2-3 Times a Week	sibol.in, mochix.com	4 Years	1, 2, 5
Natalie	25	F	Legal Assistant	11-20	Every Other Day	perezhilton.com, blogspot.com, myspace.com, livejournal.com	10 Years	1, 4, 5
Tony	31	M	Graduate Student	3-5	Every Day	slashdot.org, fark.com, treehugger.com, somethingawful.com	6 Years	1, 3, iGoogle
Matthew	26	M	Graduate Student	11-20	Several Times a Day	blogspot.com, firejoemorgan.com, kugelmass.wordpress.com, sadlyno.com	6 Years	1, 2
Laura	27	F	Admin. Assistant	3-5	2-3 Times a Week	mypapercrane.com, blogspot.com, livejournal.com, bloesem.blogs.com	2 Years	1, 4
Cheryl	24	F	Graduate Student	3-5	2-3 Times a Week	fourfour.typepad.com,	2-3 Years	1
						2manadvantage.com, nydailynews.com/blogs/mets		
Krish	22	M	Student	3-5	Every Day	metblogs.com, kiruba.com, blogspot.com, aparnasblog.wordpress.com	8 Months	1
# Para 337 2
Table 1 – Profile of participants. For tools, 1 is web browser, 2 is RSS aggregator, 3 is email client, 4 is blogging website, 5 is 
links from reader’s blog. Participants listed specific regular blogs, from which the authors generalized and chose examples.
# Para 339 4
quintessential part of going online. Whether one expects an 
email or not is unimportant, because one will check her or 
his email account not with the expectation of receiving 
email but rather as part of an Internet ritual.
# Para 343 18
Much work in information retrieval, search technologies, 
and related fields is based on the premise that the sheer 
volume of information available is simply overwhelming, 
often referred to as “information overload,” and that users 
feel compelled to try and stay on top of the ever increasing 
amount of available information. This attitude dates at least 
as far back as Barnaby Rich’s assertion, in 1613, that “one 
of the diseases of this age is the multiplicity of books; they 
doth so overcharge the world that it is not able to digest the 
abundance of idle matter that is every day hatched and 
brought forth into the world” (quoted in [4:63]). However, 
such a sense of information overload with respect to blogs 
was not common among our respondents. Only two of the 
fifteen, Charles and Lillian, expressed feeling overwhelmed 
by the potential information available through blogs. The 
other participants indicated that they are not bothered when 
they cannot stay current with the newest posts for the blogs 
they frequent. Some would eventually catch up on old posts
# Para 361 8
when the time suited them, while others simply choose the 
most recent or most interesting posts to read, skipping the 
rest. Laura reveals, “I don’t kill myself over it, because it’s 
not like I can’t always go back and see, ‘okay what 
happened two weeks ago’ ... I know what’s there and I 
know where to find it when I need it.” This attitude 
challenges the commonly accepted notion that users feel 
overwhelmed with staying constantly up to date.
# Para 369 14
It also raises interesting issues of synchronicity. Computer 
mediated communication is often considered either 
synchronous, e.g., live video or audio chat; near 
synchronous, e.g., instant messaging; or asynchronous, e.g., 
email. Clearly, there are not fine distinctions but rather a 
gradient from synchronous to asynchronous, and blogs are 
generally placed closer to the asynchronous end of the 
spectrum [21]. However, based on our participants’ 
descriptions, they do not read blogs in a temporally situated 
manner. When returning to a blog that has not been visited 
recently, it does not matter if the most recent three posts 
occurred in the past week, in the past day, or in the past 
hour. What matters is the order in which posts appear on the 
blog. The most recent post on one blog, even if it is several
# Para 383 1
1114
# Para 384 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 385 21
days old, is more likely to be read than the fourth post down 
on another blog, even if that post is from the previous day. 
This is somewhat similar to instant messaging 
conversations where time lapses between turns do not 
necessarily have an impact on the conversation [22]. Here, 
we introduce the term non-chronous to describe practices 
where individual events in one context, here a single blog, 
are considered in the temporal order in which they 
occurred, but not with regard to the specific time at which 
they occurred. This non-chronous approach does not mean 
that time-date stamps are utterly ineffectual, but they 
become much less important, especially with the advent of 
RSS aggregators, email clients, blog-host subscription lists, 
etc. For example, when Matthew falls behind on his regular 
blogs, he reads the five or so most recent posts in his RSS 
reader and his friends’ blogs. Patricia notes the time-
stamp’s existence in passing, but does not take it into 
account while reading. Generally, participants in this study 
do not see themselves as struggling to handle a deluge of 
information streaming through blogs–a missed post is not 
usually a missed opportunity.
# Para 406 11
Stepping back from the details of common blog reading 
practices, there are dramatic differences in how blog 
readers understand the visible object of their activity. When 
asked about motivations for reading blogs, participants said 
they visit blogs for information, inspiration, entertainment, 
and to a certain extent because it is just what they have 
always done. However, when asked the deceptively simple 
question, “what is a blog?” the responses were far more 
vague and varied. Patricia responded canonically, “well 
there’s the technical term and my own definition.” How 
does she determine which definition to use at what time?
# Para 417 1
“It Depends”
# Para 418 17
Among our respondents, the manner of reading and 
interacting with a blog depends on myriad factors 
including, among others, the content of the blog, the intent 
of the reader, the perceived intent of the blogger, and the 
relationship of the reader to the blogger. We argue that part 
of the reason for the great diversity in approaches to blog 
reading is the great diversity of blogs. Previous work, e.g., 
[11,21], has tried to classify blogs as a genre with certain 
structural and content-based divisions into sub-genres. 
However, our findings align more closely with boyd’s 
argument [2] that blogs are a medium, and that a variety of 
different activities and interactions can occur in and through 
that medium. Furthermore, drawing on reader-response 
theory [17], we argue that, in order to distinguish between 
different types of blogs, it may be less useful to look at the 
structure or content of the blog and more informative to 
follow the ways that readers read and interact with the blog.
# Para 435 5
The analysis presented here focuses on the following 
themes as dimensions along which approaches to blog 
reading may vary: the concept of a blog, perception and 
presentation of blogs, and “being a part” of blogs. From an 
analytic standpoint, uncovering data based on a consistent
# Para 440 31
definition of blogs seems to make intuitive sense, but given 
the fluid character of blogs it may be misleading to do so. 
Rather than trying to impose a definition of what counts or 
does not count as a blog, the authors strove for a more 
authentic, emic perspective by allowing our blog reader 
participants to decide what constitutes a blog. The styles of 
blogs that our participants read varied as much as the 
specific reading practices. These practices depend in large 
part on the reader’s approach towards, and perception of, a 
blog, which shape and reshape the activity of blogging 
itself. An example of this iterative process is Krish’s 
approach toward blogs; he generally views blogs as just 
another thing to do on the Internet when he’s bored. He 
calls himself a passive reader of blogs, unlikely to search 
out a new set of blogs despite his disappointment in the lack 
of content in the blogs he reads. However, during his blog 
reading activity Krish began to note points of interest in his 
hometown that were described in a blog. Now, when Krish 
returns home, he applies the knowledge he acquired online 
to his experience offline. Although Krish’s initial 
motivation for reading blogs shaped his self-labeled 
“passive reading” of blogs, his Internet-only experience 
reshaped itself into an activity with offline implications. 
Reader-response theory directs us to note the ways that 
individual readers read different blogs differently. While a 
blog reader may feel fine lurking on popular blogs, she or 
he may feel obligated to interact on the blogs of friends. 
Although examining format and content in order to 
categorize a blog may reveal a general understanding of a 
blog, this approach is likely to neglect the audience for 
whom the blog is, at least in part, intended.
# Para 471 1
What is a Blog?
# Para 472 22
Definitions of the term “blog” cited in the academic 
literature often resemble Herring et al.’s, “frequently 
modified web pages in which dated entries are listed in 
reverse chronological order” [10:1]. boyd [2] provides a 
survey of various definitions from dictionaries, researchers, 
mass media, and bloggers themselves. When we asked our 
participants, “what is a blog?” the responses were a mixture 
that pointed to updates, commenting capabilities, 
authorship, RSS feeds, personal content, etc. Unlike the 
bloggers boyd describes, there is little or no uniformity of 
definition among readers. For example Judith considered 
the notes on facebook.com and the blog option on 
myspace.com examples of blogs while many others did not 
agree. When asked to define a blog some participants did 
refer to the frequency of modifications, but there was no 
mention of dated entries or reverse chronological order. 
Rather than structural features, thirteen participants 
discussed interactional attributes. For many bloggers, a blog 
is not something you have, blogging is something you do 
[2]. However, among our participants, there was not such a 
clear distinction. For example, Patricia emphasizes the 
conversational nature of blogging:
# Para 494 2
A blog is something that’s still going on, that still has a 
conversation going on, that has people commenting, [it]
# Para 496 1
1115
# Para 497 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 498 4
doesn’t have to be all the time, but it does have this dialogue 
between the person who’s posting and the people who are 
reading, yeah that’s a blog.... [When the conversation stops], 
by my definition, yeah it’s a dead site.
# Para 502 5
However, not all participants stressed conversational 
interaction. Providing another perspective, Natalie suggests 
that “a blog is a journal, like an electronic journal where 
people can express whatever they want, you know, and let 
everyone read it I guess.... it could be anything I guess.”
# Para 507 8
Many respondents referred to “getting” a Xanga or 
“having” a blog, which foregrounds the blog as a 
possession and backgrounds the interactivity and process of 
blogging. Eight participants varied in their usage of the 
term “blog”: sometimes it would refer to an individual blog, 
an individual post, e.g., “I write a lot of blogs,” or even an 
entire blog-hosting site, such as when participants include 
LiveJournal in the blogs they frequently read.
# Para 515 6
In Patricia’s definition, the interaction that occurs makes it 
a blog, while in Natalie’s definition the content makes it a 
blog. “It could be anything” demonstrates just how fluid the 
notion of blog can be. Another respondent, Tony, listed a 
series of technical requirements, including commenting and 
RSS, when asked if a particular website was a blog or not:
# Para 521 7
That website is [a blog], yeah, but it doesn’t have live 
comments from people who read it. It has message boards that 
are associated with it, but they’re not as directly linked with 
different page articles, I don’t know. It’s not a static page, I 
mean every week you go to it, it will have different articles, 
but it’s not exactly the same format as a blog, it does have an 
RSS feed though so you can see what’s new on it.
# Para 528 3
If readers and writers are both involved in the co- 
construction of the blog [21], how do differences in 
definitions impact this process?
# Para 531 22
As with boyd’s [2] respondents, many readers used 
metaphors to define the term blog, and the metaphors with 
which they attempt to make sense of blogs in turn affect 
their understanding of, perception of, and interaction with 
blogs. Seven of the fifteen participants referred to blogs as a 
newspaper or magazine, and ten of the fifteen used the term 
diary or journal to describe at least one blog they read. 
These data point to the problematic nature of basing 
research on blogging activity upon the traditional format- 
oriented definition of blogs. Although a blog’s format may 
invite a certain reading, reader-response theory helps us 
understand the actual interaction or lack of interaction that 
occurs between the blog reader and the blogger. Although 
definitions found in the research literature [11,21] can be 
useful from an analytic standpoint, they may be less useful 
or even misleading when trying to understand how the 
bloggers and readers themselves approach blogging. When 
seeking to understand blogging from the blogger’s or the 
reader’s perspective, the authors found it more useful and 
informative to consider blogs not in terms of academic 
definitions, but rather in the terms of those involved in the 
activity of blogging.
# Para 553 1
Presentation and Perception
# Para 554 8
Previous work [1,2,15,23] has explored how bloggers use 
blogs as a means of presentation of self (see [9]) online. 
This section explores the other half of that phenomenon, 
that is, how readers perceive the self that bloggers present. 
In some respects, these results align with previous findings. 
However, findings about our respondents also differ in a 
number of important ways from previous assertions about 
audience and perception in blogging.
# Para 562 1
Agreement with Previous Findings
# Para 563 21
Past work on authenticity, one aspect of bloggers’ 
presentation of self, illustrates that audiences of blogs hope 
and expect authenticity, and that without it readership will 
be lost (McNeil in [15]). For blogs, authenticity does not 
hinge upon the accuracy of information they present, but 
rather upon their interpretability. (Langellier and Peterson 
in [15]). Lenhart bases her conclusion on Langellier and 
Peterson’s examination of the persistent interpretability of 
narratives. Arguing that blogs are a form of narrative, she 
posits that the blog is perceived “as one person’s ‘take’ on 
an issue, one person’s perspective on a story, left open to 
the interpretation of, and evaluation by, the reader, rather 
than as an unbiased source of information” [15:58-59]. 
Among our participants, eleven described the blogs they 
read regularly as feeling authentic. Connie “definitely [gets] 
an inside look at their lives”, while Natalie feels like she is 
traveling alongside the bloggers who write about their 
travels. All thirteen of our participants who read single- 
authored blogs recognize that posts of the blogs they read 
regularly were either opinion or personal narratives, which 
are important components of the perception of authenticity.
# Para 584 6
Blogs are generally considered a one-to-many medium, but 
are often experienced by bloggers as one-to-one [15]. In 
this study, eight participants have experienced blogs as one- 
to-one communication between them and the blogger. 
Selena says, “for like some people..., I guess sometimes I 
feel like they’re writing to me.”
# Para 590 19
This study also shows that negotiations between online and 
offline identity for blog readers are similar to those of 
bloggers. Early research into online identity, e.g., [26], 
argued that people used online worlds to create alternate 
identities or to explore certain facets of their personality 
that were not as prominent. However, more recent work, 
e.g., [1,20], has pointed to the ways in which a person’s 
online identity is a part or an extension of their offline 
identity, such as the way that Trinidadians use the Internet 
as just another way of being “Trini” [20], and that 
attempting to sever the two can be misleading and 
confusing. Similarly, while blogs and “real life” 
experiences are still distinct realms for readers, there is a 
relatively tight coupling between readers’ online and offline 
identities. Describing one of her friends, Fern says that “the 
way he types is the way he talks and thinks,” and Lillian 
hesitates to refer to only her offline friends as her “real” 
friends. Were there a connection with Patricia’s online and 
offline life, she says, “I [would be] a little bit surprised and
# Para 609 1
1116
# Para 610 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 611 17
a little bit happy that there was this link between my online 
life that I publish online with just a typical school day that it 
could be considered that I’m still the same... my screen 
name versus me.” However, she is also wary of creating too 
strong a link between her online and offline identities. “I 
don’t want my dad to find me because there was this whole 
breakup thing [between my mom and dad] and he wasn’t 
such a good person.” While Lillian was initially cautious 
about linking her knit-blogging with her life as a graduate 
student, and she still does not give out her full name online, 
she also feels that her blogging activities are “a part of [her] 
and it’s not worth hiding it.” This sort of ambivalence was 
common among participants; they do not view the set of 
identities they construct through blog reading as identical to 
their set of offline identities, but they also do not view the 
two sets as totally disjoint; most of them continuously 
negotiate and redefine the relationship between the two.
# Para 628 1
Differences from Previous Findings
# Para 629 24
Previous work on blogs has overlooked several elements of 
presentation and perception, possibly due to its focus on 
bloggers as both producers and consumers of blogs. Blog 
readers are often perceived by bloggers as an unnerving and 
anonymous group of lurkers or instigators [15], placing 
expectations on the blogger, creating awkward social 
situations, or sometimes presenting an unwanted, invading 
presence [2]. However, blog readers often approach 
different blogs differently, and may contribute differently in 
different contexts. Each participant shared that she or he 
would variously comment, lurk, or instigate, depending on 
the blog. As for commenting, eleven respondents stated that 
they would semi-regularly encounter statements or 
sentiments with which they disagreed, but only four 
participants shared instances where their views differed 
significantly and decided to express their disagreement 
through comments. However, only one of these four would 
make comments with the aim of instigating an awkward 
situation or invading the blogger’s space. Lillian is of the 
opinion that “it’s not worth being negative.” She strives to 
ensure that “whatever comes out of [her] mouth... or what 
comes out of [her] fingers is positive.” Kirsh, though, said 
that he enjoys bashing on bloggers or simply kindling 
“flame wars” of nearly unfounded, ruthless arguments.
# Para 653 14
While previous research has described the expectations 
readers place on bloggers, readers feel that there are certain 
expectations of them, as well. According to Patricia, “a 
good post deserves a reply from the audience,” and Jill sees 
“[commenting] as a courtesy.” Furthermore, while some 
comments are used as simple, lo-fi communication or 
notification mechanisms (discussed further below), many 
readers spend a significant amount of time formulating their 
comments in order for them to be coherent and insightful. 
In the rare event that Charles comments, he needs “time to 
sit down and plot out a cogent response.” While bloggers 
feel pressures about the content and identity they present, 
readers feel pressures about ensuring that their comments 
make a significant contribution. Similarly, while bloggers
# Para 667 12
may feel pressured to update, ten of our participants felt 
obligated to read or comment, particularly on friends’ blogs 
or blogs of which they felt that they were “a part” (see next 
section). Selena “admits” that there are some posts, even on 
blogs of close friends, that she does not read. Lillian was 
relieved to learn that other readers did not follow every 
single post and skimmed many. However, while a reader 
can “get away” with not reading every post without much 
notice, it is more obvious when there are lapses on the part 
of the blogger. Though expectations and obligations may 
not be symmetrical, the activity of blogging nevertheless 
exerts social pressures on both bloggers and readers.
# Para 679 14
However, the situation with respect to readers’ expectations 
is somewhat more complex still. Thirteen respondents 
expressed expectations with regard to update frequency, 
visual style, navigability, responsiveness, appropriateness, 
and other aspects. However, just as readers read different 
blogs differently, they have different expectations of 
different blogs. Expectations are often more lax for friends’ 
blogs and greater for more popular “big” blogs. On the 
other hand, for example, when readers comment on these 
big blogs, they rarely expect a response, while a comment 
on a friend’s blog almost demands reciprocation. Natalie is 
interested in travel, and so often reads and comments on 
travel blogs. She does not expect the blogger to respond to 
her questions, but is pleasantly surprised when it happens.
# Para 693 6
Differences in expectations of blogger and reader are not 
split only along the lines of friend blogs vs. big blogs. For 
example, on knit blogs, Lillian comments, answers 
questions, and provides positive feedback, but she is 
unwilling to do the same on other blogs she reads, such as a 
science blog that relates to her graduate studies.
# Para 699 13
Many of these differences—in expectations, in 
commenting, in other regards—can be traced to the reader’s 
perception of the blogger or blog, and to the reader’s 
motivation for reading. Lillian views the knit and craft 
blogs as a community and often attributes certain 
characteristics of the community to its primarily female 
composition. Tony accounts for his commenting practices 
as something he enjoys doing as an engineer. Charles reads 
blogs as a routine that helps him obtain information. Judith 
reads primarily to keep in contact with friends. It is not only 
the way the blogger presents herself or himself that affects 
the readers perception of the blogger, but also the purpose 
for which the reader is reading.
# Para 712 10
Although this paper focuses on blog readers, only three of 
the fifteen participants do not have their own blog. Despite 
the fact that many of our participants are also bloggers, at 
least nominally, the findings presented here are still 
applicable to blog readers, because, as argued above, there 
is no evidence in the literature that there exist bloggers who 
do not read blogs. However, one difference is the tendency 
for the non-bloggers to read only popular, highly trafficked 
blogs, whereas, of the twelve blog readers with blogs, ten 
used their blogs to keep up with friends. Ultimately, though,
# Para 722 1
1117
# Para 723 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 724 5
the activity of blog reading is neither a dichotomy of 
blogger versus reader nor a set of transactions that are 
confined to the materiality of the blog. “It depends” 
describes how the experience of blog reading is highly 
contingent on the individual reader and not solely the blog.
# Para 729 1
“Being a Part”
# Para 730 10
When discussions with respondents turned to themes of 
participation in, and contribution to, the blogs they read, 
eleven of them described feeling that they were a “part” of 
a blog in some way. This is distinct from the feeling of 
membership or belonging in a community [6,12]. Some 
respondents felt that they were part of a blog without ever 
making their individual presence known to the blogger or 
other readers. Being part of a blog is more than consistent 
readership, a sense of community, or a feeling of 
connectedness, although it includes all those things.
# Para 740 14
Readership is one component to being a part of a blog. 
Connie stated that, “just by reading I feel like I’m 
participating.” Nevertheless, a few question if they are part 
of any of the blogs that they read. For Charles, the idea of a 
community is a central component to the definition of a 
blog, and thus he does not feel part of a blog because he 
does not consistently contribute as he might expect a 
community-member to do. Importantly, Charles reads 
mostly “big” blogs—ones that are relatively popular, 
generate a high volume of traffic, and receive copious 
comments—and while other participants could be a part of 
a big blog without commenting, some sort of interaction 
was necessary for Charles. While an important component 
of being a part, readership alone is often not sufficient.
# Para 754 25
Six of the fifteen participants said specifically that they felt 
“connected” to a blog or blogger. Kuwabara et al.’s 
examination of FaintPop [14] revealed that the ability to 
express things that might not be considered an important 
topic of conversation, such as moods, help construct a 
feeling of connectedness. In the blogosphere, such 
examples are lo-fi comments, ones that are short, do not 
convey much content-wise, and are relatively generic. 
These comments also share certain aspects with the 
communication afforded by the Virtual Intimate Object 
(VIO) [13], in that they are relatively low bandwidth 
communication but carry a high degree of meaning and 
value for both reader and blogger. However, of the 
participants who expressed a feeling of connectedness, only 
Natalie described a feeling of presence similar to FaintPop 
or the VIO. When reading travel blogs she feels as if she is 
traveling with the blogger, sharing the blogger’s 
experiences, supporting her or his travels. Furthermore, 
though lo-fi comments are not the exception, they are not 
the rule, either. Although Cheryl feels connected to one of 
the sports-fan blogs she reads, she has yet to feel the need 
to leave comments of any sort. On the one hand, there is an 
argument that the readers who do not comment are not 
really connected, or that those who comment are more 
connected. Drawing on reader response theory, this paper
# Para 779 4
argues instead that connectedness is constituted differently 
in different contexts; being a part of a blog looks different 
for different readers, and connectedness, even when 
achieved by different means, is still connectedness.
# Para 783 18
Connectedness does not always entail feeling connected to 
the blogger as a person. Despite the distinctive personal 
style and presentation of self in many blogs, not all readers 
visit blogs for the blogger. Instead, they are more interested 
in the content or information presented on the blog. Among 
our respondents, ten of fifteen read certain blogs because 
they know or are familiar with the blogger in person, while 
eleven of fifteen read certain blogs because they want 
information about a particular topic. However, motivations 
can change over time. During the interviews, eleven 
participants described situations where they began reading 
blogs for information purposes, but continued reading 
because they developed a connection with the blogger. 
Cheryl reads fourfour, a blog with pop culture news and 
commentary. Initially, she started reading for the blogger’s 
witty and insightful entries about hip hop and “snarky 
commentary” about reality TV shows. However, the 
blogger would also occasionally post about his cats.
# Para 801 7
At first, when he was posting pictures about his cat, not that I 
thought it was a little nutty, but it was like, ‘what’s the sense 
in doing this?’, but then I would read the entries and they 
would be really cute or hilarious pictures so then I became 
even a fan of the cat postings then I was like, ‘oh my god, this 
is so petty’.... he’s a charismatic person so pretty much any 
topic you’ll get some sort of satisfaction or chuckle...
# Para 808 10
Even though Cheryl was initially drawn to the blog for the 
content, she ended up feeling connected with the blogger 
due in part to the personal information with which he 
supplemented his posts. In contrast, there were no instances 
where a blog reader began reading a blog for the blogger, 
and despite a falling out or loss of feeling connected 
continued to read for the content. This pattern suggests that, 
contrary to previous findings [2,23], it is important not to 
conflate the blogger with the content of the blog when 
considering the perspective of the reader.
# Para 818 1
SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS
# Para 819 4
This section highlights salient themes from the above 
findings as well as potential implications. These include not 
only design implications, but also more broadly future 
research directions and societal implications.
# Para 823 11
Routine – All of our participants mentioned in some way 
the habitual nature of blog reading. Charles’ statement that 
reading blogs is “something that happens” frames the reader 
as passive, neither self-aware nor reflective about their 
reading. While some participants were conscious of why 
they read blogs, few were reflective of how they read. For 
example, participants rarely reflected on the routine or 
time-consuming nature of blog reading prior to 
participation in this study. This finding suggests that 
designing tools to raise self-awareness and encourage 
reflection could be valuable in transforming routinized blog
# Para 834 1
1118
# Para 835 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 836 4
reading into a more engaging, fulfilling experience. Future 
work should also compare blog reading to other routine 
media use, such as watching television, checking email, 
reading the newspaper, or listening to the radio.
# Para 840 13
Not Information Overload – Research on information 
retrieval (IR) and related areas often asserts that the copious 
quantity of information available leads to information 
overload, wherein overwhelmed users are unable to find 
relevant or important information in the ever-growing 
deluge. However, among this study’s participants, only two 
feel overwhelmed by the information content available to 
them. These readers do not feel the need to be constantly up 
to date with everything posted in the blogs they read. More 
studies should explore information overload, or lack 
thereof, from users’ perspectives in other contexts, so as not 
to spend research time developing IR algorithms that 
alleviate a problem not actually experienced by users.
# Para 853 19
Non-chronous – While readers experience blog posts in 
temporal order, the exact times of the posts does not 
significantly impact the reading activity. The recency of a 
post has more to do with the number of other posts that 
have occurred since the post in question than with the 
amount of time that has passed. Not only does this finding 
have implications for the design of blog reading tools with 
respect to determining what content users/readers will find 
important, but it also points to the ways in which 
technologies such as blogs influence perceptions of 
temporality. The passage of time here is marked by the 
occurrence of certain events, i.e., posts, such that the 
significance of a period of time and even the perception of 
how much time has elapsed are influenced by how much 
happens in that period, i.e., how many posts occur. Future 
studies should pay attention to the ways in which the design 
and use of other technologies and communication media, 
such as instant messaging, email, or Twitter, influence how 
users perceive and constitute the passage of time.
# Para 872 16
Identity– This paper builds on previous studies of online 
identity by exploring readers’ perceptions of bloggers’ 
identities. The findings here agree with previous ones, for 
example, that online and offline identities are not 
completely separate and distinct from one another [2,20], 
but there are also differences. For example, while previous 
work has looked at the obligations the blogger feels from 
his or her audience, this paper looked also at the obligations 
readers feel toward the blogger. Also, these findings 
indicate disconnects between the pressures felt by bloggers 
and the expectations of readers. While these findings 
provide future directions for exploring identity perception 
and presentation in social media and its connection to other 
aspects of interaction, such as privacy, appropriateness, and 
authority, they also suggest a design space for tools to allow 
more nuanced interactions between bloggers and readers.
# Para 888 3
“Being a Part” – Being a part of a blog involves regular 
reading, a feeling of community, and a sense of 
connectedness, though these aspects are neither necessary
# Para 891 14
nor sufficient. What it takes to be a part of a blog varies 
depending on the individual reader and the specific blog, 
especially whether it is a “big” popular blog or a personal 
friend’s blog. Based on these varied interactions between 
reader and blog, readership is defined and constituted 
differently in different contexts. Future work should 
examine the feeling of “being a part” both in different 
social media, such as YouTube or Wikipedia, as well as in 
instances where the division between authors and readers is 
more nebulous or even nonexistent, such as social 
networking sites or Twitter. Furthermore, it will be 
important to examine how participation in these and other 
online interactions impacts our definition of what it means 
to be a member of a community, both online and offline.
# Para 905 23
Interactional Approach – drawing on reader response 
theory [3,17] and recent trends in HCI research [5], the 
research presented here takes an interactional approach to 
studying blog reading, shifting the focus from structural, 
technical, or content-oriented aspects of blogs to the 
reader’s experiences with them. This approach leads to 
novel, reader-centered definitions of the term “blog” based 
on the types of reading and interaction it allows and 
encourages. Focusing on interaction also foregrounds the 
ways in which blogs are not a genre but a medium for 
multi-directional communication among bloggers and 
readers. Previous work focused predominantly on the 
blogger, and this paper focuses mostly on readers. Future 
work should take an integrative approach, looking at the 
same interaction from both the blogger’s and the reader’s 
perspectives, as well as looking at interactions between 
blog readers in specific contexts, such as political blogs, 
religious blogs, or mommy blogs. What interactional 
aspects of blogging, including both blogger and reader, are 
unique to each of these communities? What aspects 
transcend individual communities to characterize blogging 
in general? How do common practices from blogging 
impact social interaction in other contexts beyond blogs?
# Para 928 1
CONCLUSION
# Para 929 18
In examining the increasingly common social activity of 
blogging, we must consider the experiences, roles, and 
contributions of readers, even when less readily apparent 
than those of bloggers. This paper presents a qualitative 
study that focuses on blog readers, their reading practices, 
their perceptions of blogs and bloggers, and what it means 
to be a part of a blog. The findings presented here indicate 
that the activity of blogging, of which readers are an 
integral part, is far more heterogeneous and multifaceted 
than previously suggested. Even though ten of our fifteen 
participants are between 18-25 years old and eleven of 
fifteen are students, the ways in which they read blogs, and 
even their definitions of what constitutes a blog, are 
dramatically different. The analysis here draws on reader- 
response theory to argue that, rather than using structural or 
content-based features in order to classify blogs, it may be 
more informative to consider them in terms of interactional 
features and readers’ experiences. This focus resonates with
# Para 947 1
1119
# Para 948 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Shared Authoring	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 949 11
current trends in HCI, such as embodied interaction [5]. 
This paper describes various ways in which blog reading is 
more than just reading. It leads the reader to form complex 
definitions of the term “blog,” each of which differs to 
varying degrees from the definitions used by bloggers. The 
paper also offers a view into the perception of the digital 
presentation of self in blogs. Blog reading allows for widely 
varied means of “being a part,” giving rise to new notions 
of community and belonging. This paper outlines the role of 
the reader in the activity of blogging, laying a general 
foundation for future work.
# Para 960 1
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
# Para 961 9
Thanks to the California Institute for Telecommunications 
and Information Technology, the Summer Undergraduate 
Research Fellowship in Information Technologies Program, 
the Emulex Corporation, and the Donald Bren School of 
Information and Computer Sciences for their support. 
Thanks also to Bonnie Nardi for comments on an earlier 
draft, to Peter Krapp and Nathaniel Pope for discussions 
about blogs and blogging, and to the anonymous reviewers 
for their valuable feedback and suggestions.
# Para 970 1
REFERENCES
# Para 971 3
1. boyd, d. Faceted id/entity: Managing representation in a 
digital world. Masters Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA, 2002
# Para 974 2
2. boyd, d. A blogger&apos;s blog: Exploring the definition of a 
medium Reconstruction 10, 4 (2006).
# Para 976 2
3. Davis, T.F. and Womack, K. Formalist Criticism and 
Reader-Response Theory. Palgrave, New York, 2002.
# Para 978 2
4. de Solla Price, D.J. Little Science, Big Science. 
Columbia University Press, New York, 1963.
# Para 980 2
5. Dourish, P. Where the action is. MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, 2001.
# Para 982 4
6. Driskell, R.B. and Lyon, L. Are virtual communities 
true communities? Examining the environments and 
elements of community. City &amp; Community 1, 4 (2002). 
373-390.
# Para 986 4
7. Efimova, L. and Moor, A.d., Beyond personal 
webpublishing: An exploratory study of conversational 
blogging practices. in HI Int’l Conf on Sys Sci, (2005), 
IEEE Computer Society.
# Para 990 4
8. Furukawa, T., Matsuo, Y., Ohmukai, I., Uchiyama, K. 
and Ishizuka, M., Social Networks and Reading 
Behavior in Blogosphere. in Int’l Conf on Weblogs and 
Social Media, (2007).
# Para 994 2
9. Goffman, E. The presentation of self in everyday life. 
Doubleday, New York, 1959.
# Para 996 5
10. Herring, S.C., Kouper, I., Paolillo, J.C., Scheidt, L.A., 
Tyworth, M., Welsch, P., Wright, E. and Yu, N., 
Conversations in the blogosphere: An analysis &quot;from the 
bottom up.&quot; in HI Int’l Conf on Sys Sci, (2005), IEEE 
Computer Society.
# Para 1001 3
11. Herring, S.C., Scheidt, L.A., Bonus, S. and Wright, E., 
Bridging the gap: A genre analysis of weblogs. in HI 
Int’l Conf on Sys Sci, (2004), IEEE Computer Society.
# Para 1004 2
12. Hillery, G. Definitions of community. Rural Sociology 
20, (1955), 779-791.
# Para 1006 3
13. Kaye, J., I just clicked to say I love you: Rich 
evaluations of minimal communication. in CHI 
Extended Abstracts, (2006), ACM Press, 363-368.
# Para 1009 4
14. Kuwabara, K., Watanabe, T., Ohguro, T., Itoh, Y. and 
Maeda, Y., Connectedness oriented communication 
fostering a sense of connectedness to augment social 
relationships. in SAINT, (2002), Computer Society.
# Para 1013 5
15. Lenhart, A.B. Unstable Texts: An Ethnographic Look at 
How Bloggers and Their Audience Negotiate Self- 
Presentation, Authenticity, and Norm Formation, 
Masters Thesis, Georgetown University, Washington, 
D.C., 2005.
# Para 1018 3
16. Lenhart, A.B. and Fox, S. Bloggers: A portrait of the 
Internet&apos;s new storytellers, Pew Internet &amp; American 
Life Project, 2006.
# Para 1021 2
17. Lewis, C.S. An experiment in criticism. Cambridge 
University Press, 1992.
# Para 1023 2
18. Lofland, J. and Lofland, L. Analyzing social settings: A 
guide to qualitative observation and analysis.
# Para 1025 1
Wadsworth, Belmont, CA, 1995.
# Para 1026 2
19. Marlow, C., Audience, Structure, and Authority in the 
Weblog Community. in Int’l Comm Assoc Conf, (2004).
# Para 1028 3
20. Miller, D. and Slater, D. Chapter One - Conclusions. in 
The Internet: An Ethnographic Approach, Berg, Oxford, 
2000.
# Para 1031 4
21. Nardi, B.A., Schiano, D.J. and Gumbrecht, M., 
Blogging as social activity, or, would you let 900 
million people read your diary? in ACM CSCW, (2004), 
ACM Press, 222-231.
# Para 1035 3
22. Nardi, B.A., Whittaker, S. and Bradner, E., Interaction 
and outeraction: instant messaging in action. in ACM 
CSCW, (2000), ACM Press, 79--88.
# Para 1038 3
23. Reed, A. &apos;My blog is me&apos;: Texts and person in UK 
online journal culture (and anthropology). Ethnos 70, 2 
(2005).
# Para 1041 2
24. Schmidt, J. Blogging practices: An analytical 
framework. Journal of CMC 12, 4, (2007).
# Para 1043 3
25. Sifry, D. The State of the Live Web, Technorati, 2007, 
accessed September 4, 2007, from 
http://www.sifry.com/alerts/archives/000493.html.
# Para 1046 2
26. Turkle, S. Life on the Screen. Simon and Schuster, New 
York, 1995.
# Para 1048 1
27. www.almaden.ibm.com/cs/wbi. Accessed July 2007.
# Para 1049 3
28. Wyche, S.P., Taylor, A. and Kaye, J., Pottering: A 
design-oriented investigation. in CHI Extended 
Abstracts, (2007), ACM Press, 1893-1898.
# Para 1052 1
1120
