# Para 0 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 1 1
SearchBar: A Search-Centric Web History for Task
# Para 2 1
Resumption and Information Re-finding
# Para 3 4
Dan Morris, Meredith Ringel Morris, Gina Venolia
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA
{dan, merrie, gina.venolia}@microsoft.com
# Para 7 1
ABSTRACT
# Para 8 18
Current user interfaces for Web search, including browsers 
and search engine sites, typically treat search as a transient 
activity. However, people often conduct complex, multi- 
query investigations that may span long durations and may 
be interrupted by other tasks. In this paper, we first present 
the results of a survey of users’ search habits, which show 
that many search tasks span long periods of time. We then 
introduce SearchBar, a system for proactively and 
persistently storing query histories, browsing histories, and 
users’ notes and ratings in an interrelated fashion. 
SearchBar supports multi-session investigations by 
assisting with task context resumption and information re- 
finding. We describe a user study comparing use of 
SearchBar to status-quo tools such as browser histories, and 
discuss our findings, which show that users find SearchBar 
valuable for task reacquisition. Our study also reveals the 
strategies employed by users of status-quo tools for 
handling multi-query, multi-session search tasks.
# Para 26 1
Author Keywords
# Para 27 1
Web search interfaces, Web history, persistent search.
# Para 28 1
ACM Classification Keywords
# Para 29 1
H3.3. Information search and retrieval: Search process.
# Para 30 1
INTRODUCTION
# Para 31 13
Web browsers and search engine sites are the primary tools 
people use to access the vast quantities of information 
available online. These tools typically treat information- 
seeking tasks as a transient activity, considering each of a 
user’s search and browse actions as unrelated events rather 
than as part of a larger task. For example, if a user is 
searching for information on digital cameras, he will 
perform several low-level interactions with a Web browser 
and one or more search engines, e.g. typing the URL of a 
search engine site, querying for “digital camera ratings”, 
clicking a result, hitting the back button, submitting a 
second query, etc. Although the browser views these 
actions as unrelated events, the user views them at a task
# Para 44 6
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
# Para 50 1
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
# Para 51 1
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00.
# Para 52 2
level, i.e., “figure out what digital camera to purchase”, and 
current search UIs don’t provide affordances at this level.
# Para 54 17
Considering search and browse actions in isolation results 
in impoverished user interfaces that do not adequately assist 
users with common scenarios such as re-finding previously 
encountered Web pages, resuming an activity after an 
interruption, or conducting complex, multi-session 
investigations. In this paper, we present evidence that users 
often conduct multi-session Web investigations, along with 
evidence that such tasks are not adequately supported by 
current tools. We then present SearchBar, a system for 
proactively and persistently storing query histories, 
browsing histories, and users’ notes and ratings in an 
interrelated fashion. We describe a study comparing 
SearchBar to status quo interfaces for Web information- 
seeking tasks, and report detailed findings on both the 
benefits of the SearchBar approach and on users’ general 
strategies for handling complex, exploratory search tasks. 
We conclude with a discussion of related and future work.
# Para 71 6
Throughout this paper, we use the term query to refer 
specifically to keyword search using a general-purpose or 
vertical search engine, and the terms search and 
investigation to refer to the high-level task of finding 
content online using a variety of methods, such as querying, 
browsing, or navigating directly to known URLs.
# Para 77 1
MOTIVATION
# Para 78 4
In this section, we discuss research that highlights some of 
the shortcomings of current tools for information-seeking 
tasks, specifically re-finding information and managing 
interruptions during information-seeking.
# Para 82 1
Re-finding and Re-searching
# Para 83 13
Several studies have found that people frequently revisit 
previously viewed online content. For example, Aula et 
al.’s survey of experienced Web users [1] found that people 
use search engines more frequently than history or 
bookmarking tools to re-find online information, but often 
have difficulty remembering what queries they had used 
when they originally discovered the content in question. 
Jones et al. [11] conducted interviews about how people 
“keep found things found”, and discovered that the most 
common strategy for re-finding information was to “do 
nothing”, i.e. to not take explicit actions such as 
bookmarking or taking notes, but rather to assume 
(sometimes incorrectly) that one would be able to re-find
# Para 96 1
1207
# Para 97 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 98 27
needed content later on. Kellar et al. [14] interviewed Web 
users about content-monitoring habits, and identified 
information-gathering as a class of activity that often 
involved revisiting sites to monitor for changed 
information. They found that people relied on a 
combination of bookmarks, auto-completion, and search 
engines to return to the sites they monitored. Teevan et al. 
[25] conducted a study of Yahoo!’s query logs showing that 
nearly 40% of queries were attempts to re-find previously 
encountered results. Tauscher and Greenberg [24] studied 
users’ browser logs over a six-week period, and found that 
58% of the pages visited were actually re-visits, while 
Cockburn and MacKenzie [5] reported an even higher rate 
of revisitation (81%). Wen [28] asked study participants to 
re-find pages that they had visited during a search task, and 
observed an overall success rate below 20%. Nearly all 
participants in Wen’s study tried to re-create their search 
paths to re-find information. A more recent study by 
Obendorf et al. [19] found that about 44% of pages visited 
were revisits. Their study revealed that users employed 
strategies such as re-searching and re-tracing to re-find 
content viewed a week or more in the past, but the authors 
noted that such strategies often frustrated users, due to 
problems remembering their original query or to expired 
link coloring information. They also note that browser 
history was nearly unused by participants, initiating only 
0.2% of all actions despite the high rate of re-visitation.
# Para 125 6
In summary, there is significant evidence that re-finding 
information constitutes a significant portion of Web use, 
and that current browser-based mechanisms that support 
this activity are poorly utilized. Obendorf et al. noted that 
“A time and task based search history could help to redo 
searches.” SearchBar is a realization of such a system.
# Para 131 1
Interruptions, Multi-tasking, and Multi-Session Tasks
# Para 132 5
In addition to re-finding previously encountered 
information, another user need not explicitly addressed by 
current Web interfaces is task resumption after an 
interruption. This interruption might be self-generated (i.e., 
multi-tasking) or externally generated.
# Para 137 1
Previous Research on Interruptions and Search
# Para 138 10
Interruptions often cause people to forget the nature of a 
task they meant to complete [18]. Such interruptions are 
common – a diary study of knowledge workers found an 
average of 50 task shifts per person during a typical work 
week [6], and a log study found an average of 3.74 e-mail 
or IM-driven task shifts per hour, taking between 8 and 10 
minutes on average for the person to return to the 
interrupted task [9]. However, previous work has not 
specifically explored how users manage interruptions 
during Web search tasks, as we do in our study.
# Para 148 6
Sellen et al.’s study of knowledge workers’ Web use [23] 
reported that 40% of the “information gathering” activities 
they observed (similar to Broder’s definition of 
“informational searches” [3]) were not completed in a 
single sitting, often due to external interruptions. Such 
“multi-session” information-seeking activities were also
# Para 154 3
Table 1. The 170 respondents who had resumed a Web search
after a gap in time reported the longest gap they recalled between
suspension and resumption.
# Para 157 7
Time Before Resumption	Respondents
Minutes	1.2%
Hours	24%
Days	51%
Weeks	13%
Months	10%
Years	1.2%
# Para 164 6
reported by Obendorf et al. [19], whose client-side log 
study of Web use found that an average of 15% of Web 
page revisits occurred after periods of a week or more; 
while this represented only a small portion of Web activity, 
the users in their study indicated that these long-term 
revisits were important but were difficult to achieve.
# Para 170 1
Survey on Search Habits
# Para 171 20
To learn more about multi-session Web investigations, we 
conducted our own formative study, surveying information 
workers at a large technology company about their Web 
search habits and needs. Our survey was sent to 740 people 
and was completed by 204 (28% response rate). 80% of 
respondents were male. Ages ranged from 21 – 61 years old 
(median = 36). Respondents had varied job roles within the 
company, such as software developers, researchers, 
managers, administrative assistants, attorneys, and student 
interns. All respondents self-identified as average (27%) or 
expert (74%) Web searchers, with none identifying as 
novice. All but one respondent reported using a search 
engine to find information online at least once per day. Our 
survey asked questions about a variety of Web use habits, 
many of which are beyond the scope of this paper. Here, we 
report only on portions of the survey relevant to the 
suspension, resumption, and/or re-execution of information- 
seeking tasks. We also highlight that the data presented in 
this section are self-reported, so we use these results as 
design guidelines but cannot verify their absolute accuracy.
# Para 191 6
We found that multi-session information-seeking tasks were 
a common experience among this demographic, with 83% 
of respondents answering “Yes” to the question “Have you 
ever had a Web information-seeking task that has lasted for 
longer than a single session (i. e., a task which you put aside 
and resumed at a later time)?”
# Para 197 9
We asked several follow-up questions to the 170 
respondents who reported engaging in multi-session 
investigations. First, we asked them to report the longest 
gap they had experienced between suspending and 
resuming an investigation. The results in Table 1 show 
these responses, which indicate that time gaps before 
resumption can be lengthy – 75% indicated experiencing 
gaps of at least a full day, while 24% reported gaps of a 
week or more before resumption.
# Para 206 1
We then asked these respondents to describe the strategies
# Para 207 1
1208
# Para 208 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 209 2
Table 2. Percent of respondents (n = 170) who mentioned using 
the following strategies when resuming a suspended investigation.
# Para 211 16
Strategy	Respondents
Active Storage / Active Retrieval	55%
Written or typed notes	30%
Browser bookmarks	26%
Save Web pages locally as files	5.3%
E-mail to self	2.4%
Online bookmarks/tagging	1.8%
Print Web pages	0.6%
Passive Storage / Active Retrieval	8.2%
Browser history	7.6%
Online query history	1.2%
Passive Storage / Passive Retrieval	49%
Memory	36%
Leave browser open	14%
Link coloring	2.4%
Autocomplete	2.4%
# Para 227 2
they use to refamiliarize themselves with the context of 
their suspended investigations upon resumption.
# Para 229 15
The common strategies described by respondents can be 
distinguished along two axes: initiative (whether the user 
was active or passive) and stage (whether the strategy 
applies to the storage or retrieval of the task context). For 
example, an active approach to storage attempts to preserve 
the state, strategies, and/or results of a search task for later 
use, while a passive approach to storage involves no 
explicit user actions to save information during a search 
session. An active approach to retrieval seeks out 
mechanisms that have captured data (either explicitly or 
implicitly) that may help in re-establishing a search context, 
while a passive retrieval strategy uses only information that 
is automatically revealed by basic browser or search engine 
interfaces. We describe strategies by indicating the 
initiative type for each of those stages.
# Para 244 6
Active Storage/Active Retrieval strategies reported in our 
survey included saving the contents of a website (either into 
a local file or by printing), bookmarking a website (either 
locally in the browser or via an online bookmarking utility), 
and note-taking (either by hand, by typing into a document, 
via self-email, or via instant messages).
# Para 250 4
Examples of Passive Storage/Active Retrieval strategies 
include using browser history to find information from a 
previously executed search task, or visiting a search-engine-
specific query history tracker to re-find a useful query.
# Para 254 5
Passive Storage/Passive Retrieval strategies reported by our 
survey population included relying on memory when 
resuming a search (and possibly starting over and repeating 
previously issued queries), leaving the browser open on the 
machine when suspending a task so its state was preserved
# Para 259 4
upon resumption, relying on the browser’s autocomplete 
functionality to serve as a memory aid when typing queries, 
and relying on the browser’s coloring of visited links to 
prompt memory about previously viewed Web sites.
# Para 263 7
Table 2 shows the percentage of people in our survey 
population who reported employing each of the above 
strategies (note that the numbers total to more than 100%, 
as some people listed several of these strategies). Note that 
no respondents described using an Active Storage/Passive 
Retrieval strategy, which is not surprising given that such a 
combination represents wasted storage effort.
# Para 270 6
In summary, previous work and our own survey indicate 
that information-seeking tasks are frequently interrupted, 
yet current Web browsers provide only partial support for 
task resumption. Furthermore, our data show that an 
effective tool for re-finding information should support a 
variety of re-access strategies.
# Para 276 1
SEARCHBAR
# Para 277 14
To improve the user experience of resuming suspended 
investigations and re-finding previously encountered online 
content, we created SearchBar (Figure 1), a system for 
capturing, storing, and presenting an annotatable, integrated 
search and browsing history within the context of a Web 
browser. SearchBar is implemented as a plugin for Internet 
Explorer. As such, it is able to monitor all navigation 
events, to recognize URLs corresponding to common 
search engines, and to track a user’s browsing history 
subsequent to a search. More details on these features are 
provided below. Once enabled, SearchBar is visible in any 
new tabs or browser windows the user creates, and content 
is mirrored across all of these views. SearchBar can be 
hidden or revealed using a keyboard shortcut.
# Para 291 19
SearchBar presents visited Web pages hierarchically 
according to the search queries that led to those visits. A 
recent Pew Internet Project report [20] found that search 
engine use was the second most common online activity, 
after e-mail. The ubiquity of search in Web use, users’ 
tendencies to repeat previously executed searches [25, 26], 
and the tendency of informational [3, 21] and exploratory 
[29] search tasks to involve multiple query-browse 
iterations inspired us to use queries as a fundamental 
organization metaphor in the SearchBar interface. Thus, 
SearchBar functions as a rich history mechanism, 
proactively capturing all queries issued and URLs visited 
subsequent to each query. The search-centric structure is 
manifested by showing all URLs browsed to subsequent to 
a query as child nodes of that query, in reverse- 
chronological order, thus revealing to users the process 
through which they reached a piece of information. 
Clicking on a URL or query navigates the browser to that 
page or those search results.
# Para 310 4
For the large portion of users who choose to employ only 
Passive Storage strategies, all queries and browsing are 
proactively captured and stored under SearchBar’s 
“Default” topic. However, for those users who prefer to
# Para 314 1
1209
# Para 315 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 316 3
Figure 1: A screenshot showing SearchBar running within Internet Explorer. The SearchBar (left pane) includes a hierarchical history of
recent search topics, queries, and results visited, along with the user’s notes on the current topic. The right pane is a standard Web browser,
currently showing a summary of the active SearchBar topic.
# Para 319 12
employ Active Storage strategies, SearchBar offers the 
ability to create custom-named topics. All search engine 
queries and all navigation events subsequent to a query are 
stored under the currently-selected topic. The user can 
move URLs and queries among topics by dragging and 
dropping, if desired. Since our own survey and others’ prior 
work have reported that users often return to search tasks 
after gaps of a week or more, the topical organization can 
add value by helping such users more quickly resume their 
task contexts. Users may also delete topics, queries, or 
URLs from SearchBar via a right-click context menu. 
Deletion undo is provided via a recycle bin.
# Para 331 9
30% of our survey respondents reported taking notes as a 
way to help manage multi-session investigations. However, 
since these notes are stored in files or on paper, they can be 
difficult for users to retrieve when they eventually resume 
their searches. Hence, we added a note-taking region to the 
SearchBar itself, allowing users to keep their notes where 
they will be immediately visible when users resume their 
tasks. Notes are associated with the currently-selected topic 
and are automatically saved.
# Para 340 8
Users can also press the “thumbs up” button to indicate that 
a particular page is especially relevant to the current topic. 
This associates a “thumbs up” icon with the currently 
viewed Web page’s SearchBar entry, making the page 
easier to identify and return to quickly and also elevating 
the page to the top of the that topic’s summary (see below). 
Users can select a checkbox which filters the SearchBar to 
only display items that have been rated in this manner.
# Para 348 10
SearchBar captures queries from several major search 
engines (Yahoo!, Google, and Windows Live Search) as 
well as several popular vertical search services (e.g., 
Amazon.com, Wikipedia, CNET, and CitySearch). A 
branding icon next to each query indicates the source used 
for that search. SearchBar is extensible, allowing easy 
addition of additional search sources. This enables 
SearchBar to produce a more comprehensive history than 
engine-specific query histories, since it incorporates 
searches from the variety of sources that people utilize.
# Para 358 3
Clicking on any topic’s title displays an automatically- 
generated summary in the browser window, which shows 
any notes the user has taken on that topic and lists all the
# Para 361 1
1210
# Para 362 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 363 6
pages the user has indicated as especially relevant, as well 
as giving a chronological history of all the queries issued 
and pages visited on that topic. All queries and pages in the 
summary and in the standard SearchBar display are 
hyperlinks that return the user to the associated query 
results or Web page.
# Para 369 1
EVALUATION
# Para 370 7
We conducted a study to evaluate the usability of 
SearchBar, and to explore whether it would be more 
effective in allowing users to manage, suspend, and resume 
multi-session, multi-query searches than status-quo tools. 
All of our study’s tasks fall into Broder’s “informational” 
task category [3]; this is consistent with our focus on 
complex, multi-session searches.
# Para 377 1
Demographics
# Para 378 6
We recruited 16 paid participants (9 female), none affiliated 
with our institution, ranging in age from their 20’s to their 
60’s. Participants had a variety of occupations, and included 
an attorney, an editor, a business owner, a marketing 
specialist, and an insurance salesperson. Only two 
participants had technical professions.
# Para 384 1
Methodology
# Para 385 8
Our study had a between-subjects design, with eight 
participants each in the control and experimental 
conditions. In the control condition, participants completed 
the study tasks using Internet Explorer 7, and in the 
experimental condition participants used Internet Explorer 7 
with the SearchBar plugin. The two conditions were 
otherwise identical. Each participant came to the lab for two 
sessions, each 90 minutes long, scheduled one week apart.
# Para 393 6
When participants arrived for the first session, they were 
seated at a dual-monitor (19” each) computer. Internet 
Explorer 7 (with the SearchBar plugin, in the experimental 
condition) was open on the left monitor, with the home 
page set to a search engine site, and a “Travel Itinerary” 
document was open on the right monitor.
# Para 399 12
Participants were told that they would play the role of the 
administrative assistant to the CEO of a fictional 
corporation. The CEO had requested that the assistant 
complete the itinerary for his upcoming business trip to 
Prague (none of the participants had ever visited Prague). 
The participant was given a printed copy of an e-mail from 
the CEO describing his itinerary requirements, such as the 
dates of his travel, his desire to visit three famous historic 
sites, see three theatre productions, etc. They were 
instructed to fill in the travel itinerary document, which 
initially contained only headings such as “museums”, 
“theatre”, etc., as per the requests in the CEO’s e-mail.
# Para 411 7
Participants were also told that the CEO might interrupt 
them by sending instant messages (IMs) if he required 
immediate assistance. Participants were also told that they 
could use any available tools to assist them in managing 
their task, including pen and paper (provided), the Word, 
Excel, and Notepad applications (to which shortcuts were 
placed on the computer’s desktop), or any features of
# Para 418 5
Internet Explorer (e.g., bookmarks, history). If participants 
were in the experimental condition, we also introduced 
them to SearchBar, allowing them to complete a tutorial 
and ask questions. Participants were not told anything about 
what would occur during the second week of the study.
# Para 423 22
After each participant had been working on the travel 
itinerary task for seven minutes, the experimenter sent an 
IM (playing the role of the CEO) asking for the name of a 
restaurant in Chicago that served New York Style pizza 
where he could take a client for lunch during a business 
trip. After the participant sent a response, the CEO told him 
to resume working on the itinerary. After the participant 
worked on the itinerary for seven more minutes, the CEO 
sent another IM, asking the assistant to recommend a digital 
camera he should purchase that met certain resolution and 
zoom requirements. Afterwards, the participant again 
resumed work on the itinerary for seven more minutes, 
when the CEO sent another IM requesting statistics about 
the incidence of the flu during 2005 and 2006, in order to 
help him decide whether to pay for employee flu shots. 
After this, the participant returned again to the itinerary task 
for one more minute, after which point the experimenter 
asked him to stop. To minimize user frustration and fatigue, 
if the participant took longer than seven minutes on any of 
the interrupting tasks, the CEO sent a follow-up IM asking 
for the best URL the participant had found so far, and then 
telling him or her to return to the travel itinerary task.
# Para 445 12
Participants then completed a questionnaire soliciting 
demographic information, information about their search 
habits, information about the session’s tasks and the 
strategies employed by the participant, and feedback on the 
SearchBar tool (experimental condition only). After each 
participant left, the experimenter saved all state, including 
the browser’s bookmarks and history, SearchBar data files, 
the itinerary document, and any additional digital or paper 
notes taken by the participant. Note that all participants 
used separate accounts on the study machine, so that the 
history, bookmarks, etc. in the Web browser reflected only 
their own actions and not those of other participants.
# Para 457 10
When participants arrived for the second session, one week 
later1, the setup was the same as the first week’s. Internet 
Explorer retained any settings they had accrued during the 
first session (bookmarks, history, SearchBar entries, etc.). 
Any digital notes they saved in other documents were still 
on the computer, and any paper notes they took were on the 
desk, along with the printout of the CEO’s travel requests. 
However, the travel itinerary document was the blank 
template from the first session, containing none of the 
content they had added the first week.
# Para 467 2
Participants were told they would reprise their role as 
assistant to the CEO, who wanted his travel itinerary
# Para 469 3
1 Three participants (all in the experimental condition) 
deviated from this one-week gap between sessions, 
returning after 6 days, 8 days, and 13 days respectively.
# Para 472 1
1211
# Para 473 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 474 14
finished. Each participant was told that the computer was in 
the same state in which he had left it the previous week, 
except that a computer virus had destroyed the itinerary file. 
Participants were instructed to recreate the missing contents 
of the itinerary to the best of their ability, and, when they 
had finished doing so, to continue completing the itinerary 
by filling in the portions they had not had time to attend to 
the first week. Note that the itinerary task was refined 
through pilot testing to be long enough such that no 
participant completed the entire itinerary during either week 
of the study. Participants were also told that the CEO might 
still IM them if more pressing tasks arose. For the 
experimental condition, a printed copy of the SearchBar 
tutorial was available on the desk for reference.
# Para 488 14
Once again, the experimenter sent instant messages from 
the “CEO” to the participant after seven minute intervals of 
working on the travel itinerary task. This time, each of the 
three instant messages solicited information that depended 
on content found the first week: the name of a hotel located 
near the recommended pizza restaurant, the name of a store 
selling the recommended camera for a good price, and a 
comparison of the 2005-2006 flu incidence with that of 
prior years. Note that in each case, any specific information 
supplied by the participant to the experimenter the previous 
week, such as the camera model the participant had 
originally recommended, was not provided in the instant 
message; rather, we were interested in observing how easily 
participants could re-find this information.
# Para 502 6
As in the first session, after the participant responded to the 
final IM and had resumed work on the travel itinerary for 
one more minute, the experimenter stopped the session and 
distributed a second questionnaire, which solicited feedback 
on that session’s tasks and the strategies employed, and also 
on the SearchBar tool itself (experimental condition only).
# Para 508 13
Data gathered during the study included notes and 
observations from two experimenters who observed each 
session, questionnaires completed after each session, the 
itinerary documents from each of the two sessions, the 
transcripts of the instant messages, an enhanced browser 
history that included all navigations, window management 
events, and keyboard/mouse events, the browser’s 
bookmark lists, and any other digital or paper notes taken 
by participants. For participants in the experimental 
condition, we also logged the contents of the SearchBar and 
all interactions with the SearchBar, including passive 
interactions (insertion of new queries) and active 
interactions (clicking on results, creating topics, etc.).
# Para 521 1
RESULTS
# Para 522 1
Motivating Trends
# Para 523 3
At the end of the first session, we asked several questions 
about participants’ general search habits, which 
reconfirmed the motivations behind the creation of the
# Para 526 7
SearchBar prototype 2. The majority of participants reported 
that they have difficulty keeping track of information when 
conducting exploratory searches (median Likert response = 
4.0), that they enter the same query terms multiple times 
(median = 4.0), and that they do not always finish an 
exploratory or informational search task in one sitting 
(median = 4.0).
# Para 533 14
We also asked our sixteen participants the same survey 
questions about multi-session searches that we asked as part 
of our larger survey (see Introduction section). The 
response pattern observed in our questionnaire is very 
similar to that observed in our survey, which had targeted a 
more technical demographic, suggesting that our survey 
findings generalize beyond technical workers to more 
diverse gender, occupational, and technical skill 
backgrounds. 94% of our participants reported having 
engaged in multi-session searches, and 80% of those who 
had performed multi-session searches reported resumption 
gaps of a day or more, with 40% recalling occasions when a 
week or more passed before they resumed a suspended 
search task.
# Para 547 1
General Task Strategies
# Para 548 8
We observed several general trends in search strategies that 
were common across the majority of participants. The use 
of the Web browser’s tabs to assist with task management 
was one salient trend. During the first session, all sixteen 
participants opened a new browser tab at least once when 
beginning a new task related to the CEO’s interruptions, 
and then returned to an old tab after finishing with the 
interrupting task.
# Para 556 7
The use of multiple search sources was another common 
trend we observed: 81% of participants used at least one 
vertical search engine (in addition to a general-purpose 
search engine) during the study, and 56% used two or more 
different general-purpose search engines. Overall, 88% of 
participants used multiple search engines at some point 
during the study.
# Para 563 7
Only two participants (both in the control condition) made 
bookmarks during the first week; these participants also 
accessed these bookmarks during the second session. 
However, only one of these participants made bookmarks 
relevant to the study tasks; the other used bookmarks only 
to mark two of his favorite search engine sites and to switch 
among those sites quickly.
# Para 570 2
Five participants (all in the control condition) used the 
browser’s history during the second session of the study. Of
# Para 572 7
2 Because our data is not normally distributed, all analyses 
use non-parametric tests. We use the Mann-Whitney U test 
for comparisons between the control and experimental 
groups, and the Wilcoxon test for comparisons of the 
experimental participants’ week 1 versus week 2 data. 
Likert scale responses are on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 = 
strongly disagree and 5 = strongly agree.
# Para 579 1
1212
# Para 580 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 581 4
the five people who used history, three had difficulty 
finding it (two had to use the browser’s “help” facility to 
locate the history, and one requested assistance from the 
experimenters in locating it).
# Para 585 1
Impact on Task Resumption
# Para 586 15
Participants’ feedback indicated that SearchBar made it 
easier to re-find information during the second session, with 
less redundant work. Participants using SearchBar reported 
significantly more agreement with the statement “It was 
easy to faithfully reproduce deleted portions of the travel 
itinerary” (median = 4.0) than those in the control condition 
(median = 2.5) (z = -1.93, p = .05). SearchBar users also 
reported significantly less agreement with the statement “I 
repeated a lot of work that I had done last week in order to 
re-find relevant information” (median = 2.0) than those in 
the control condition (median = 4.0) (z = -3.07, p &lt; .01). 
Also, for the “flu vaccine” task, which participants in both 
conditions rated as the most difficult of the tasks they 
performed, participants using SearchBar agreed 
significantly more that “It was easy to find information that
# Para 601 3
I encountered last week about the flu vaccine” (median = 
4.5) than those in the control condition (median = 2.0) (z = 
-2.28, p &lt; .03).
# Para 604 27
Analysis of the experimental group’s log files support 
participants’ perceptions that SearchBar assisted them in 
avoiding redundant work. Participants in the experimental 
condition clicked on queries and pages in the SearchBar to 
achieve 31.7% of re-querying actions and 31.5% of re- 
navigation actions, respectively. The value of SearchBar 
seemed more apparent to users during the second week of 
the study, when they relied on the tool for re-navigating 
significantly more (μ = 42.2% of re-navigations) than 
during the first week (μ = 23.5% of re-navigations) 
(z = 2.52, p &lt; .02) (mean numbers of re-navigations were 
37 and 41.5, respectively). The remainder of re-navigation 
events were initiated by other in-browser mechanisms, such 
as auto-completion of URLs or following previously- 
followed links. Similarly, in the first week of the study, all 
sixteen participants opened a new browser tab to initiate a 
new search task at least once during the course of the 
session. However, in the second week this behavior was 
primarily observed among control-condition participants: 
six control-condition participants and only one 
experimental-condition participant (z = -2.44, p &lt; .02). We 
hypothesize that this difference can be attributed to the 
availability of SearchBar, namely that the persistent state 
provided by SearchBar enabled experimental-condition 
participants to multi-task without opening additional tabs 
(which was a common strategy among control-condition 
participants for maintaining persistent state).
# Para 631 5
In both conditions, participants performed similarly in 
terms of their abilities to faithfully reproduce the contents 
of the deleted travel itinerary, accurately reproducing, on 
average, 74.7% of their entries (4.9 entries) from week 1 in 
the control group and 74.0% in the experimental (4.5
# Para 636 18
entries).3 However, participants using SearchBar made 
more progress on adding new content to the itinerary in 
addition to completing the reproduction of week one’s 
entries4; participants in the control condition completed a 
mean of 2.0 extra itinerary items, while SearchBar 
participants completed a mean of 3.75 extra entries. Note 
that, while this trend suggests that SearchBar helped 
participants re-find content more effectively than status-quo 
tools, this difference is not statistically significant. 
However, participants’ abilities to successfully re-find 
information in the control condition was likely artificially 
inflated by the study design – because the participants’ 
computer accounts were used only during the study sessions 
themselves, their browser histories were relatively short and 
uncluttered with pages from other intervening tasks, making 
the history a much simpler and, likely, more usable re- 
finding tool than it would be in an ecologically valid 
setting.
# Para 654 6
Experimental participants’ questionnaire responses after the 
second session (Table 3) show that they agreed strongly 
that SearchBar helped them remember what they had 
accomplished during the first week and made it easier to re- 
find relevant information about the CEO’s interrupting 
requests.
# Para 660 1
SearchBar Usability
# Para 661 13
Table 3 shows experimental participants’ Likert-scale 
ratings of the usability of SearchBar’s features, after both 
the first and second session. Participants gave high overall 
ratings to SearchBar’s usability, indicating agreement that it 
was easy to learn and remember how to use SearchBar. 
Although participants rated SearchBar as only moderately 
useful during the first week (median = 3.5), when they were 
able to use open tabs to maintain the context of interrupted 
tasks, the utility rating increased dramatically the second 
week (median = 5) (z = -1.91, p = .05), indicating that 
SearchBar was highly valued for resuming longer-term 
suspended tasks where it was not possible to maintain 
context via unchanging browser state.
# Para 674 8
Participants did not mind the screen real-estate devoted to 
SearchBar, indicating disagreement with the statement that 
it took up too much space in the browser window, even 
during the first week when it was less heavily utilized. 
Participants also indicated that they would use SearchBar 
both at home and at work, indicating on average that they 
would likely use it between one and multiple times per day 
in each setting. The ability to utilize topics as an
# Para 682 3
3 Note that one control-group participant’s week 1 itinerary 
was corrupted; only the remaining 15 participants’ data was 
considered in the comparison of week 1 and 2 itineraries.
# Para 685 5
4 We use itinerary items completed as a proxy for 
efficiency, since timing data was difficult to accurately 
measure because several participants completed portions of 
the itinerary out of order, mixing their re-creation of old 
content with their addition of new content.
# Para 690 1
1213
# Para 691 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 692 2
Table 3. Experimental group’s median Likert-scale ratings of the
SearchBar tool after the first and second sessions.
# Para 694 17
	Week	Week
	1	2
It was easy to learn how to use SearchBar.	4.5	N/A
The organization by topics was helpful.	4	4.5
The per-topic summaries were helpful.	4	4
SearchBar	was	useful	for	accomplishing	3.5	5
today’s tasks.		
The “thumbs up” feature was helpful.	3.5	3.5
The ability to take notes using SearchBar was helpful.	3	3
SearchBar took up too much space in my browser window.	2	2
SearchBar was confusing to use.	1.5	1.5
It was difficult to remember to create a new topic.	4	4
It	was	easy	to	remember	how	to	use	N/A	5
SearchBar.		
SearchBar helped me	remember what I	N/A	5
accomplished last week.		
SearchBar made it easy to re-find information about cameras, restaurants, and flu vaccines that I had encountered last week.	N/A	4.5
# Para 711 6
organizational structure, the thumbs up feature, and the 
summaries were seen as the most useful aspects of the tool; 
the note-taking feature was less popular. Log file analysis 
shows that participants indeed used the “thumbs up” feature 
frequently, marking a mean of 8.25 pages each with a 
thumbs up during the study.
# Para 717 18
However, some participants stated that it was difficult to 
remember to create a new topic before beginning a search 
task. Log file analysis shows that participants did take the 
time to create topics, creating a mean of 2.0 topics each 
during the study. However, this average number of topics is 
lower than the number of tasks completed, reflecting the 
fact that participants used other methods, primarily the 
maintenance of multiple tabs in their browsers, for 
separating tasks during short-term interruptions and multi-
tasking. Two of the eight experimental participants created 
six topics each, while three did not create any topics; this 
variance is not surprising given our survey findings 
showing that people differ in whether they use active or 
passive storage strategies during Web investigations. 
However, even those who utilized a more passive approach 
and didn’t take time to create their own topics still benefited 
from SearchBar’s proactive capture and automatically- 
imposed query/navigation structure.
# Para 735 1
DISCUSSION
# Para 736 5
The results presented in the previous section confirm that 
SearchBar is intuitive and easy to use. Although they were 
not explicitly required to use SearchBar during our study, 
participants made extensive use of SearchBar for re- 
executing queries and re-visiting Web pages and appeared
# Para 741 7
to integrate SearchBar into their workflow thoroughly and 
immediately. Questionnaire results also support this notion; 
participants indicated that SearchBar was easy to learn and 
easy to remember to use a week later. Perhaps most 
importantly, participants indicated that SearchBar was 
useful in accomplishing search tasks, particularly when 
resuming a task after a long interruption.
# Para 748 18
One of the major drawbacks of SearchBar is the need to 
create topics manually. Questionnaire results confirmed that 
participants found it difficult to remember to create a new 
topic when initiating a new task, although several 
participants did use this feature. The need to create new 
topics before beginning a search task is reduced 
significantly by the ability to create topics after the fact and 
move existing queries into the new topic; this is likely to be 
particularly common in long-term, real-world use, where 
users may begin a search task expecting to use only a small 
set of queries and later see that task evolve into a larger 
investigation. Note that topic creation is not always 
necessary: for smaller tasks, the automatic insertion of 
search queries into the “Default” topic often suffices, and 
will still provide SearchBar’s query-centric Web history 
and representation of query iteration. Automatic creation of 
new topics based on lexical, semantic, or temporal 
relationships among queries remains as future work.
# Para 766 10
Furthermore, SearchBar presently tracks only browsing 
sequences which begin with a search query, when in fact 
other browsing mechanisms, such as directly typing URLs 
into a browser, could also be used to continue a search, 
even without an intervening query. More sophisticated 
mechanisms for associating continued browsing with recent 
queries thus remain an important topic of future work; such 
mechanisms might be based on semantic similarity between 
a page and a recent query or temporal proximity between a 
navigation event and a recent query.
# Para 776 6
A longitudinal study assessing SearchBar’s scalability over 
time was beyond the scope of the present evaluation. The 
history and bookmarking systems in current browsers, for 
example, typically become cluttered as a result of long-term 
use. However, we aimed to make SearchBar more scalable 
than current history tools by:
# Para 782 4
(a) Using a hierarchical model centered around elements 
(topics and queries) that are meaningful to the user, 
which allows a user to browse a dense hierarchy more 
efficiently than a date- or site-based hierarchy.
# Para 786 1
(b) Enabling rating-based filtering of the history.
# Para 787 3
(c) Highlighting a past topic if a query contained by that 
topic is performed again later, thereby alleviating the 
need to manually explore the hierarchy in many cases.
# Para 790 5
In addition to studying the utility and usability of 
SearchBar, our study allowed us to explore the mechanisms 
used by both experimental and control participants to 
conduct search tasks and to manage search tasks across 
interruptions. One particularly surprising result was the
# Para 795 1
1214
# Para 796 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 797 10
extensive use of browser tabs among our participants: 
although we did not recruit participants for familiarity with 
tabs and did not recruit from a highly technical user 
population, all sixteen participants opened multiple tabs 
during the study. This is in contrast with results reported by 
Weinreich et al [27], who noted that seven of thirteen 
Firefox users in a 2006 log study “hardly opened any tabs”. 
We hypothesize that this dramatic increase in tab use 
represents increased adoption of tabs even in the short span 
of time since that work was published.
# Para 807 11
We also specifically observed a previously-unreported use 
of browser tabs as a mechanism for managing interruptions 
in search tasks: during the first session, all sixteen 
participants opened a new tab in response to an interrupting 
search task. This indicates that the creation of a new tab is 
potentially a valuable statistical indicator of a boundary 
between tasks, and may be applied to automatic delineation 
of Web search topics or to intelligent timing of 
interruptions and alerts. This may help address one of 
SearchBar’s primary limitations, namely its reliance on the 
user to delineate task boundaries.
# Para 818 10
Additionally, our evaluation suggests that typical Web users 
make use of multiple search engines: 88% of participants 
used multiple general-purpose and/or vertical search 
engines. This motivates the need for a client-side tool for 
logging query histories; server-side history tools hosted by 
a search engine will log only searches conducted at that 
site. Coupled with the privacy implications of using search 
engines as primary re-finding instruments, which requires 
storing a persistent personal browsing history on a remote 
server, client-side support for re-finding may be desirable.
# Para 828 11
One possible limitation of our evaluation’s ecological 
validity is that no additional content was inserted into 
SearchBar between sessions, which may not be typical of a 
one-week interruption in a search task. However, the tools 
typically used for restoring search context – history, 
favorites, link coloring, autocomplete notes – would all also 
have been subject to increased “clutter” over a week of real- 
world use, and we hypothesize that due to SearchBar’s use 
of a semantically-meaningful hierarchy based on topics and 
queries, users would be more easily able to sort through 
clutter using SearchBar than using existing mechanisms.
# Para 839 1
RELATED WORK
# Para 840 1
Browser Features
# Para 841 11
Several mechanisms for representing browsing history and 
re-finding information are ubiquitous in current Web 
browsers. Browsers provide a comprehensive and 
proactively-collected navigation history that can be sorted 
alphabetically or chronologically (although this history is 
rarely utilized [1]) and a mechanism for actively collecting 
relevant links into a hierarchy (referred to as “favorites” or 
“bookmarks” depending on the browser). Browsers also 
support coloring of HTML links conditioned on whether a 
link has been previously visited within a specified time 
window, in order to assist users in re-tracing (or avoiding
# Para 852 5
re-tracing) navigation paths. Browsers also offer automatic 
completion of partial URLs or terms entered into text entry 
fields for both navigation and search, based on recently- 
visited pages or recently-executed queries, which can also 
assist in query recall or re-finding of URLs.
# Para 857 1
Commercial Systems
# Para 858 22
Several commercial services assist users in collecting and 
re-finding Web-based information. Google Web History 
provides server-side logging of Google searches a user 
conducts and results subsequently clicked; a user can later 
view all queries and results clicked in a chronological list. 
This service also allows users to search pages they have 
visited directly from Google searches; installation of the 
Google Toolbar optionally extends this history list and 
search capacity to all Web pages a user has visited. This 
service has the advantage of existing on a remote server and 
thus traveling with a user to multiple computers, but is not 
integrated directly with Web browsing (as SearchBar is), 
does not capture queries from other search sites, and 
requires the user to consent to fairly comprehensive server- 
side logging and tracking. Del.icio.us is an online 
bookmarking service, which allows bookmarks to travel 
with a user and allows sharing of bookmarks among users. 
Google Notebook similarly allows server-side storage of 
links, and also allows storage of notes and images. Onfolio 
is an extension to the Windows Live Toolbar that provides 
similar note-taking and “clipping” functionality as a client- 
side application.
# Para 880 1
Research Systems
# Para 881 22
Several systems enable users to manually create collections 
of online content. Session Highlights [10] provides a 
workspace to which users can drag URLs, similar to a 
conventional bookmarking system but using thumbnails to 
represent pages and employing a strict chronological 
ordering. WebView [4] provides a thumbnail-based web 
history that can be ordered chronologically or hierarchically 
by site. Flagging of useful pages both implicitly and 
explicitly is integrated directly into the history system by 
showing “dog-ear” marks on page thumbnails, representing 
either an explicitly-marked page or a frequently-visited 
page. The Hunter Gatherer system [22] allows users to 
highlight components of a Web page and, using a shortcut 
key, place those components into a persistent notebook. 
Dontcheva et al. [7] present a system for summarizing 
personal web browsing sessions, which presents a richer 
summary than that provided by SearchBar, but at the cost of 
more manual intervention and annotation. Jones et al. [12] 
explore the needs of users managing complex projects that 
span multiple applications, including Web search, and 
introduce the Project Planner system, which allows users to 
organize a variety of task-related content.
# Para 903 5
The SearchPad [2] system was designed as a lightweight 
notebook that assisted users in keeping track of a search’s 
progress, and is similar to SearchBar in that its organization 
is centered around queries. SearchPad supported passive 
storage of queries, and it modified search engine result
# Para 908 1
1215
# Para 909 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Web Visits in the Long	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 910 5
pages to allow active storage of search results for later 
review (by adding a “mark” button to all search results). 
SearchPad could optionally be docked into a Web browser 
to allow integration with search results, but did not persist 
when a user navigated away from a search results page.
# Para 915 15
The S3 [17] and SearchTogether [16] systems provide 
dedicated interfaces for conducting Web searches and 
record subsequent navigations into a persistent history that 
can be shared among users. Previous work (e.g. 
[8],[13],[15]) has explored alternative visual representations 
for Web history, but those systems have not used search 
queries as the primary organizational system for Web 
history. Like SearchBar, these tools all aim to assist users 
with informational search tasks; however, SearchBar differs 
from prior art in that it is a search-centric history 
mechanism that aims to assist users in regaining the context 
of multi-session investigations by providing both 
proactively gathered information (queries and subsequent 
pages visited) as well as optional explicit user annotations 
(topic designations, thumbs-up ratings, and notes).
# Para 930 1
CONCLUSION
# Para 931 1
The primary contributions of this work are threefold:
# Para 932 5
1) We presented results from a survey on Web search 
habits, which found that multi-session investigations are 
common. Along with the results from this survey, we 
presented a taxonomy of strategies presently used to 
maintain and restore context for exploratory searches.
# Para 937 9
2) We presented SearchBar, a novel tool for organizing 
Web history that supports re-acquisition of search context 
after interruptions. SearchBar uses search topics and search 
queries as its fundamental organizational metaphors to 
organize the Web pages subsequently browsed. An 
evaluation of this tool demonstrated that first-time users are 
able to effectively use this interface to complete a complex 
search task and make use of its affordances for re-finding 
information obtained via Web search.
# Para 946 5
3) We presented additional study results that describe the 
mechanisms used by Web searchers in general to re-find 
information and manage searches across interruptions, 
which will inform future work on SearchBar and related 
work on supporting Web search and multi-tasking.
# Para 951 6
Future work will include a broader deployment of 
SearchBar to explore the use of this tool over longer periods 
of time and within a larger user population. Future 
development of SearchBar will focus on automating the 
creation of search topics and delineating tasks based on user 
actions such as tab creation and initiation of new queries.
# Para 957 1
REFERENCES
# Para 958 2
1. Aula, A., Jhaveri, N., and Käki, M. Information Search and 
Re-access Strategies of Experienced Web Users. WWW 2005.
# Para 960 2
2. Bharat, K. SearchPad: Explicit Capture of Search Context to 
Support Web Search. WWW 2000, 493-501.
# Para 962 2
3. Broder, A. A Taxonomy of Web Search. ACM SIGIR Forum, 
36(2), 2002, 3-10.
# Para 964 3
4. Cockburn, A., Greenberg, S., McKenzie, B., Smith, M. and 
Kaasten, S. WebView: A Graphical Aid for Revisiting Web 
Pages. OZCHI 1999.
# Para 967 2
5. Cockburn, A. and McKenzie, B. What Do Web Users Do? An 
Empirical Analysis of Web Use. IJHCS, 2001, 54(6), 903-922.
# Para 969 2
6. Czerwinski, M., Horvitz, E., and Wilhite, S. A Diary Study of 
Task Switching and Interruptions. CHI 2004, 175-182.
# Para 971 2
7. Dontcheva, M., Drucker, S., Wade, G., Salesin, D., Cohen, M. 
Summarizing Personal Web Browsing Sessions. UIST 2006.
# Para 973 3
8. Hightower, R., Ring, L., Helfman, J., Bederson, B., and 
Hollan, J. Graphical Multiscale Web Histories: A Study of 
Padprints. Hypertext 1998, 58-65.
# Para 976 2
9. Iqbal, S., Horvitz, E. Disruption and Recovery of Computing 
Tasks: Field Study, Analysis, and Directions. CHI 2007.
# Para 978 2
10. Jhaveri, N. and Räihä, K. 2005. The advantages of a cross- 
session web workspace. CHI 2005 Extended Abstracts.
# Para 980 3
11. Jones, W., Bruce, H., and Dumais, S. How Do People Get 
Back to Information on the Web? How Can They Do it 
Better? Interact 2003, 793-796.
# Para 983 2
12. Jones, W., Bruce, H., Foxley, A., Munat, C. Planning Personal 
Projects and Organizing Personal Information. ASIST 2006.
# Para 985 2
13. Kaasten, S. and Greenberg, S. Integrating Back, History, and 
Bookmarks in Web Browsers. CHI 2001 Ext. Abs., 379-380.
# Para 987 2
14. Kellar, M., Watters, C., and Inkpen, K. An Exploration of 
Web-Based Monitoring: Implications for Design. CHI 2007.
# Para 989 3
15. Milic-Frayling, N., Sommerer, R., and Rodden, K. WebScout: 
Support for Revisitation of Web Pages within a Navigation 
Session. WI 2003, 689-693.
# Para 992 2
16. Morris, M.R. and Horvitz, E. SearchTogether: An Interface for 
Collaborative Web Search. UIST 2007, 3-12.
# Para 994 2
17. Morris, M.R. and Horvitz, E. S3: Storable, Shareable Search. 
Interact 2007, 120-123.
# Para 996 2
18. O’Connail, B. and Frohlich, D. Timespace in the Workplace: 
Dealing with Interruptions. CHI 1995 Ext. Abs., 262-263.
# Para 998 3
19. Obendorf, H., Weinreich, H., Herder, E., and Mayer, M. Web 
Page Revisitation Revisited: Implications of a Long-Term 
Click-Stream Study of Browser Usage. CHI 2007, 597-606.
# Para 1001 2
20. Rainie, L. and Shermak, J. Search Engine Use, November 
2005. Pew Internet and American Life Report.
# Para 1003 2
21. Rose, D. and Levinson, D. Understanding User Goals in Web 
Search. WWW 2004, 13-19.
# Para 1005 3
22. schraefel, m.c., Zhu, Y., Modjeska, D., Wigdor, D., and Zhao, 
S. Hunger Gatherer: Interaction Support for the Creation and 
Management of Within-Web-Page Collections. WWW 2002.
# Para 1008 2
23. Sellen, A., Murphy, R., and Shaw, K. How Knowledge 
Workers Use the Web. CHI 2002, 227-234.
# Para 1010 2
24. Tauscher, L. and Greenberg, S. Revisitation Patterns in World 
Wide Web Navigation. CHI 1997, 399-406.
# Para 1012 2
25. Teevan, J., Adar, E., Jones, R., and Potts, M. Information Re- 
Retrieval: Repeat Queries in Yahoo’s Logs. SIGIR 2007.
# Para 1014 2
26. Teevan, J. The Re:Search Engine: Simultaneous Support for 
Finding and Re-Finding. UIST 2007, 23-32.
# Para 1016 3
27. Weinrech, H., Obendorf, H., Herder, E., and Mayer, M. Off 
the Beaten Tracks: Exploring Three Aspects of Web 
Navigation. WWW 2006, 133-142.
# Para 1019 2
28. Wen, K. Post-Valued Recall Web Pages: User Disorientation 
Hits the Big Time. IT &amp; Society, Vol 1, No 3 (2003), 184-194.
# Para 1021 2
29. White, R., Kules, B., Drucker, S., and schraefel, m.c. 
Supporting Exploratory Search. CACM, 49(4), 2006.
# Para 1023 1
1216
