# Para 0 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 1 1
Ambient Social TV:
# Para 2 1
Drawing People into a Shared Experience
# Para 3 5
Gunnar Harboe, Crysta J. Metcalf, Frank Bentley,
Joe Tullio, Noel Massey, Guy Romano
Motorola Labs
1295 E. Algonquin Rd., Schaumburg, IL 60196
{gunnar.harboe, crysta.metcalf, f.bentley, joe.tullio, noel.massey, guy} @motorola.com
# Para 8 1
ABSTRACT
# Para 9 11
We examine how ambient displays can augment social 
television. Social TV 2 is an interactive television solution 
that incorporates two ambient displays to convey to 
participants an aggregate view of their friends’ current TV- 
watching status. Social TV 2 also allows users to see which 
television shows friends and family are watching and send 
lightweight messages from within the TV-viewing 
experience. Through a two-week field study we found the 
ambient displays to be an integral part of the experience. 
We present the results of our field study with a discussion 
of the implications for future social systems in the home.
# Para 20 1
Author Keywords
# Para 21 2
Social television, interactive television, social presence 
awareness, ambient displays, field trial
# Para 23 1
ACM Classification Keywords
# Para 24 2
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.
# Para 26 1
INTRODUCTION
# Para 27 6
Although Internet use is gaining importance, TV watching 
is still the primary recreational activity of American adults, 
accounting for half of all leisure time [7]. Although there is 
great social potential in TV watching as a shared activity 
and a topic for conversation [20], at least half of all people 
usually watch alone [10].
# Para 33 5
Many technologies coming out of the interactive television 
(iTV) field, such as Video-On-Demand and Personal Video 
Recorders (PVRs), focus on providing personalization and 
greater individual control. They cater to viewers as isolated 
individuals, and fragment audiences further [16].
# Para 38 3
However, in recent years ‘social television,’ the idea of 
using communication technology to connect TV viewers, in 
order to create remotely shared experiences around TV
# Para 41 6
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.
# Para 47 1
CHI 2008, April 5–10, 2008, Florence, Italy.
# Para 48 1
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-011-1/08/04...$5.00 
# Para 49 12
content, has received much attention. Proponents of this 
idea see television as a social experience capable of 
reinforcing bonds in strong-tie relationships. TV 
programming can provide the common, shared experience 
that serves as a basis for socialization, even for groups who 
are already fairly close [29]. Social television systems 
typically integrate some combination of text chat, voice 
chat or video chat with TV programming, and use presence 
to provide awareness of the status and context of other users 
of the system [5, 9, 15, 23]. These efforts tie into earlier 
CMC work on telepresence and co-viewing, but come at the 
design and research questions from a different angle.
# Para 61 11
In previous work we noted that users of social television 
systems would benefit from features that indicate favorable 
times for shared viewing [15]. One solution is to use 
always-on ambient displays to let users be aware of when 
others are watching TV. From a research standpoint, we can 
then examine how this kind of awareness helps or 
encourages people to get in touch through their social 
televisions, and in particular, how it is used to initiate and 
escalate communication sessions. As no extended field 
trials of social television systems have been reported to 
date, these important issues remain largely unexplored.
# Para 72 19
In this paper, we present results from a two-week field 
study of Social TV 2, an experimental social television 
system that incorporates an ambient display component to 
provide awareness of remote viewers. Two groups of five 
households participated, with the members of each group 
comprising an existing social circle. In addition to standard 
social television functionality, Social TV 2 incorporates 
ambient displays in order to keep users aware of the 
participation of their friends and family. We found that the 
ambient displays proved to be a defining component of the 
system. The displays were effective indicators of good 
times to use Social TV 2, increased participants’ awareness 
of others’ TV-viewing schedules, and encouraged 
participation in the system. This participation often began 
as a glance at the ambient display – a quick check on the 
status of a participant’s social network, but would 
frequently escalate to deeper or more extended 
communication. In this way, participants began treating TV 
watching as a fundamentally social activity. Thus, the
# Para 91 1
1
# Para 92 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 93 2
Figure 1: The Social TV 2 system in use. The ambient
orb is visible in the upper left, above the television.
# Para 95 2
addition of ambient displays helped to fulfill the design 
objectives of the system.
# Para 97 12
In the following sections, we describe the design of our 
Social TV 2 prototype, which we then put in the context of 
existing work in both the social television and ambient 
display literature. We outline unanswered questions that led 
us to initiate this work and describe the mixed-method 
approach to our field study. We then present our results, 
describing how the ambient devices functioned as 
traditional presence displays and as components of a more 
complex communication system. Lastly, we show how 
these findings bear on other social applications in the home, 
and outline our future goals for social television research 
and design.
# Para 109 1
SOCIAL TV 2
# Para 110 13
Social TV 2 follows Social TV, the system previously 
described in Harboe et al. [15]. It is a prototype system that 
allows remotely located friends and family to experience 
some of the benefits of sitting next to one another on the 
couch and watching a TV program together (Figure 1). To 
provide this experience, we supplement typical TV 
functions with two additional features: TV presence 
information, and the ability to send and receive lightweight 
messages. The features were selected to specifically 
investigate people’s behaviors at the boundaries of the 
social television experience, as they begin and end their 
interactions, rather than the details of how they acted while 
fully engaged in the communication experience.
# Para 123 5
The prototype is implemented as a PC application running 
on top of GBPVR1 media center software. The system uses 
on-screen displays to communicate which of the user’s 
friends or family (‘buddies’) are currently watching, what 
they are watching, and what they have watched in the past.
# Para 128 1
1 http://www.gbpvr.com/
# Para 129 5
The laptop running the Social TV 2 software is connected 
to a television, and all interaction with the system is 
performed with a standard remote control. For our field 
tests we chose to use a TiVo® remote that had several keys 
relabeled to correspond to the features of our system.
# Para 134 1
TV Presence
# Para 135 15
A key requirement for encouraging participation in social 
television is the ability to make users aware of when their 
friends and family are logged into the system and watching 
programs on TV. This information can be viewed from an 
on-screen buddy list (Figure 2). The deployed system has 
two presence states: ‘watching TV’ and ‘away’. The ‘away’ 
state is intended to inform buddies that a user is not 
currently watching TV. It is set automatically when the TV 
is turned off or when no interactions with the system are 
detected for some time after a program has ended. Users 
can also disconnect from the social component of the 
system if they wish to watch TV in privacy, and will then 
appear to others to be ‘away.’ However, in this state many 
of the features of the system are disabled, preserving a ‘see 
and be seen’ information reciprocity.
# Para 150 5
Users can change to the same program that their buddy is 
watching from the buddy list. Additionally, whenever the 
channel is changed, a list of buddies who are also watching 
that program is displayed as part of the transient channel 
information banner.
# Para 155 1
Ambient Devices
# Para 156 9
While Social TV 2’s on-screen display provides presence 
awareness on the television, we wanted another means to 
convey this information when the TV wasn’t on, or when 
users were in a different room and unable to see the TV. 
We chose to use two separate displays capable of 
communicating information unobtrusively, visible from 
anywhere in a room, and which would fit in as household 
objects. The system has two different display devices to 
meet these needs (Figure 3).
# Para 165 1
Figure 2: The Social TV 2 on-screen buddy list.
# Para 166 1
2
# Para 167 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 168 2
Figure 3: The orb and Chumby devices displaying a 
purple color (more than one friend is watching TV).
# Para 170 6
As our primary ambient display, we chose the Ambient 
Orb, a color changing lamp from Ambient Devices,2 and 
configured it to display the current number of buddies 
watching television. Different colors are used to indicate 
whether one (blue), more than one (purple), or no other 
buddies (yellow) are currently watching TV.
# Para 176 12
The orb was connected via serial cable to our prototype, 
and therefore had to be placed close to the TV. As people 
often spend much of their time outside of the living room 
[1], we wanted to include a second display for times when 
users could not see the primary ambient display. The 
Chumby3 is a WiFi-enabled internet appliance with a 3.5&quot; 
LCD color display Though we would have preferred to use 
a second orb, the Chumby provided faster updates and more 
reliable wireless reception than the orb’s pager-based 
network alternative. We wrote a Flash widget for the 
Chumby that follows the color of the living room orb in 
near-synchronization (within 15 seconds).
# Para 188 8
Besides providing information about the number of buddies 
online, we wanted to use the displays to attract users to the 
system when a friend or family member invited them to 
watch a show with them. To signal this, we designed the 
displays to pulse slowly between the current color and 
black. We did not want the flashing to be too distracting, 
but wanted users to notice it so that they could come to their 
televisions if they desired.
# Para 196 1
Messaging
# Para 197 5
We provided no voice or freeform text communication 
features. However, users can send ‘suggestions’ to invite a 
buddy to watch their current show together. If the buddy 
accepts the suggestion, the system automatically changes 
the channel to that program.
# Para 202 7
When two or more buddies are watching the same program, 
the prototype allows them to send messages to each other. 
In the first round of this study, the system allowed only 
three expressions, in the form of graphical thumbs-up, 
thumbs-down, or ‘shout-out’ emoticons. After this 
deployment, we received feedback that our participants 
wanted to send a wider variety of messages. Therefore, for
# Para 209 1
2 http://www.ambientdevices.com/
# Para 210 1
3 http://www.chumby.com/
# Para 211 6
the second group, we implemented a new feature that 
replaced the generic ‘shout-out’ message with 
approximately 20 pre-determined messages such as “How 
is this show?”, “This sucks!”, or “Call me”. A number of 
possible replies are available (“Good!”, “Bad!”, etc.), as 
well as the thumbs-up and thumbs-down emoticons.
# Para 217 1
RELATED WORK
# Para 218 1
Social Television Systems and Studies
# Para 219 14
The idea of communicating and sharing awareness through 
the television set has been explored by a number of 
different researchers. However, social television systems as 
yet remain confined to labs and limited trials. AmigoTV, 
described by Coppens et al. [9], was an early social 
television system that included presence, a buddy list, 
invitations, emoticons, and voice chat, but no facilities for 
indicating presence while offline. Telebuddies, by Luyten et 
al. [21], takes a different approach to the challenge of 
drawing users into the experience, using a friend-of-a-friend 
profile of interests and social relationships to match users 
with suitable communication partners. A more 
comprehensive review of social television systems can be 
found in Harboe et al. [14].
# Para 233 11
Geerts [14] and Baillie et al. [2] conducted user studies of 
AmigoTV, both of them lab experiments comparing voice 
communication to other modalities. Weisz et al. [29] and 
Regan and Todd [24] examined groups or pairs of friends 
and strangers using text chat while watching videos or TV 
together. Similarly, Oehlberg et al. studied groups of 
friends and acquaintances watching television, both in 
collocated groups and connected via an audio link [23]. 
Finally, In Harboe et al. we examined friends and family 
watching TV in a voice chat setting; this in the participants’ 
homes rather than the lab [15].
# Para 244 6
All these studies were based on single-session events. None 
of them looked at the process by which a shared viewing 
experience is initiated or how the systems are used over 
time. However, Boertjes has announced a prolonged in- 
home study of a social television system called ConnecTV 
[5], and we await those results with interest.
# Para 250 7
Building on this existing work, we are extending the social 
television concept by including additional facilities for 
offline awareness of TV presence information. In addition, 
we are presenting results from the field that that throw light 
on the real-world use of television-based sociability, and 
which suggest design considerations for future social 
television systems.
# Para 257 1
Social Awareness Systems for the Home
# Para 258 4
Hindus et al. created and evaluated a number of social and 
communication systems, with varying levels of media 
richness, for the home [18]. They note that consumers 
wanted devices with multiple communication modes.
# Para 262 2
In the context of domestic video calling over the TV, 
Hemmeryckx-Deleersnijder and Thorne integrated an
# Para 264 1
3
# Para 265 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 266 4
awareness component that displayed images automatically 
captured from the environment [17]. In their scenario, they 
seek to provide background awareness and help negotiate 
conversation engagement.
# Para 270 6
De Ruyter et al. compared different degrees of peripheral 
awareness of remote friends (displayed as video) while 
watching a shared TV program [27]. The system in their 
study only supported awareness while in a shared viewing 
session. Markopoulos et al. provide an overview of other 
awareness systems [22].
# Para 276 1
Evaluation of Ambient Displays
# Para 277 18
While the ambient display literature contains a wealth of 
design examples, it contains few reports of field 
evaluations. CareNet [8], a combination ambient/interactive 
display for elder care, arrived at a number of useful findings 
for the design of effective ambient displays for the home. 
Rowan et al. showed how an ambient display can foster 
connectedness and promote communication between elders 
and their adult children [26]. In addition to these studies, 
other researchers have shown how ambient displays can 
maintain a sense of connectedness between friends and 
loved ones [12, 28]. The Whereabouts clock [6] shows how 
simple location and messaging capabilities can enhance 
connectedness and allow family members make inferences 
about each others’ activities using their existing knowledge 
of one another. In this work, we build on these findings to 
demonstrate how ambient displays can be designed into a 
larger social application to promote use of that system and 
fulfill its goals of strengthening social bonds.
# Para 295 1
METHODS
# Para 296 12
In the design of our field study, we were interested to see 
whether the ambient displays met our design goal of 
encouraging social television participation during those 
periods when a participant’s friends and family were also 
using the system, if it led to other forms of communication, 
and how it would ultimately affect the feelings of 
connectedness between our participants. Striving to 
understand these patterns of behavior is an essentially 
qualitative question, and our approach was largely 
exploratory. We ran two separate in-home trials. Five 
households were recruited for each trial, and each trial 
lasted 14 days.
# Para 308 1
Recruitment
# Para 309 9
Participants were recruited using an independent recruiting 
agency that was instructed to find social groups in which 
the various household members were mutual friends, and 
all had strong ties with one another. The actual relationships 
between the recruited households varied (Figure 4). In both 
trials there was a central ‘hub’ (A1, B1), a person who 
knew and recruited all the other participants, but there were 
also at least two households who were more peripheral, 
without strong ties to the rest of the group. In both trials the
# Para 318 2
Figure 4: Social ties between households in our field
trials. Dashed lines represent acquaintances.
# Para 320 4
central hub was a woman, and the four friends she recruited 
female. However, in each group some of the husbands 
knew each other, and in the second group two of the 
husbands were best friends.
# Para 324 9
Group A, our first group, consisted of four couples living in 
their own households, two with (very young) children. The 
fifth participant was recently engaged, but still living with 
her parents and brother. Ages of the main participants 
ranged from 26 to 33. A2 and A5 are sisters, and A3 is the 
cousin of A1’s husband. A5 was not friends with anyone 
else in the study except her sister, and A3 and A4 knew 
each other only tangentially from having attended the same 
parties.
# Para 333 8
In Group B, our second group, all five nuclear families 
were living in their own households, and all five households 
included teenage children. Ages of the main participants 
ranged from 46 to 53. B1 was very close friends with B2 
and B4, and knew B3 and B5 well. Again we had a pair of 
sisters: B4 and B5, but B2, B3, and B4 only see each other 
at the parties of mutual friends, and B5 did not remember 
ever meeting B2 and B3.
# Para 341 7
While there were some husbands in both groups who knew 
each other well, and some of the teenage children in Group 
B knew each other, their relationships, for the most part, 
mirrored those of our female main participants. Thus, we 
had a number of different kinds of relationships represented 
in the two social groups, but neither group was uniformly 
tight-knit.
# Para 348 1
Deployment
# Para 349 9
For each household, the Social TV 2 system was installed 
in the room participants reported as being the most common 
place for watching TV. As mentioned earlier, Groups A and 
B received slightly different versions of the software, as a 
result of an iterative design process on the basis of Group 
A’s feedback. Each household was given one orb and one 
Chumby. We asked participants to place the Chumby in any 
part of their home where they spent a significant amount of 
time or passed by frequently. Six participants put it in the
# Para 358 1
4
# Para 359 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 360 9
kitchen, two in a hallway, and one in a bedroom. The last 
Chumby malfunctioned and was not used. Participants were 
given a brief (20 minute) introduction to the system and its 
features, and a phone number for technical support that they 
could call at any time. We asked each participant to use the 
system the way they would if they were not in a study, and 
explained that they did not have to use every feature, or any 
feature, unless they wanted to. Other household members 
were also welcome to use the system, and generally did so.
# Para 369 1
Data Collection
# Para 370 2
We used multiple methods for data collection, including 
interviews, usage logs, and voice mail diaries.
# Para 372 12
There were three sets of semi-structured interviews for each 
household. The initial interview lasted about half an hour 
and was used to collect background information. In a phone 
interview after the first week, lasting between 15 and 30 
minutes, we gathered data about the participants’ use of and 
reactions to the prototype during the first week. And the 
final interview, lasting from an hour to an hour and half, 
was structured to collect more detailed information on a 
number of topics. Whenever possible, we asked other 
household members to participate in the interviews. We 
recorded a total of 22 hours of interview data, but much of 
the material falls outside the scope of this paper.
# Para 384 7
We logged all interactions with the system, in order to 
document actual usage and to allow us to examine 
interesting incidents in detail later. The logs, then, provide 
support for some of the events described in the interviews. 
Cameras or sensors in the home would have been useful to 
put the system use in context, but we felt this would be too 
intrusive and technically complex for this study.
# Para 391 13
Instead, voice mail diaries were used to collect information 
on behaviors we could neither log nor directly observe, and 
which we were afraid would be forgotten prior to the 
interviews. We devised questions about behaviors 
surrounding the ambient presence/awareness features, 
communications with other people in the study, and their 
reactions to, as well as use of, the various features. So that 
the questions would not influence our participants’ behavior 
in advance, the participants were given 14 sealed envelopes, 
one for each day of the study, each containing that day’s 
questions. Thus, participants had the questions in front of 
them as they provided their feedback. Participants left 3 
hours and 41 minutes of voice mail messages in total.
# Para 404 1
Analysis
# Para 405 4
From the log data we extracted some basic measures of 
system use (Table 1). Given the small scale and non- 
experimental design of the study, we did not attempt further 
statistical treatment of the quantitative data.
# Para 409 4
The bulk of the analysis was instead qualitative, using a 
variation of the affinity diagram method. We reviewed the 
interview and voice mail data, and extracted observations, 
statements (which we transcribed) and behavioral
# Para 413 7
Activity	A	B
TV watched, connected (hrs)	154.27	180.77
TV watched, disconnected (hrs)	21.81	0.34
Buddy list views	185	390
Joined show through buddy list	62	160
Emoticons sent	59	120
Canned messages sent	N/A	185
# Para 420 1
Table 1: Aggregate usage data by group.
# Para 421 2
descriptions relating to ambient presence and awareness. 
These items were printed out as sticky notes.
# Para 423 11
Then, working as a team, we put these items together into 
groups or categories, a process of “comparison, contrast, 
and integration” [19]. To efficiently organize the data we 
used an affinity-like post-it chart [4]. Here we followed 
Bernard: As the categories were identified we would “pull 
all the data (that is, exemplars) from those categories 
together and compare them, considering not only what 
[items belong] in each emerging category but also how the 
categories are linked together” [3]. The patterns that 
emerged from this analysis process form the basis of the 
results that follow.
# Para 434 1
RESULTS
# Para 435 7
Our analysis identified several themes around the effect and 
effectiveness of our ambient displays. We first discuss their 
basic ability to communicate presence information, and 
then go on to talk about how they functioned as part of the 
larger Social TV 2 system. Throughout, we use quotes from 
the interviews and voice mail diaries to illustrate each 
particular theme in our participants’ own words.
# Para 442 1
Effectiveness as Ambient Displays
# Para 443 4
In considering how the ambient information interacted with 
the other components of the Social TV 2 system, the orb 
and Chumby would only be relevant if they actually 
functioned as ambient displays. Fortunately, they did.
# Para 447 1
Noticing and interpreting the displays
# Para 448 11
Our participants saw and noticed the changing colors of the 
orb, and by and large understood what they signified. B3: “I 
notice when the color’s on, whether it’s purple or blue, I 
know that someone else is actually on the system.” In fact, 
several participants commented on the orb consistently 
drawing their attention. B 1 mentioned in the final interview 
that “every time I passed by, a thousand times a day, I 
would look to see what color it was.” Only one participant, 
B4, could not account for the meaning of the different 
colors. When asked if she knew what they signified, she 
answered: “[My daughter] does, I don’t.”
# Para 459 2
The pulsing signal that the ambient devices sent when a 
suggestion was received was less widely understood. Many
# Para 461 1
5
# Para 462 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 463 13
participants confused pulsing with just changing colors. For 
example, B3 said “I’m not sure if it was pulsating or just 
changing purple to blue, to purple to blue [ ... ] I honestly 
don’t know...” This may partly have been a problem of 
terminology. More substantially, at least part of the reason 
for the confusion was that few participants saw the pulsing 
happen. Most invitations were sent to people who were 
already watching TV, and who accepted or declined them 
before they had a chance to notice the ambient devices 
pulsing. Another likely contributing factor was the subtlety 
of the signal: “I love the orb, but when it flashes, I wish it 
flashed a different color or did something crazy. I can’t tell 
when it’s flashing sometimes.” (A2)
# Para 476 17
A number of participants reported that they were less aware 
of the Chumby than of the orb. As B3 said: “I think it&apos;s kind 
of a non-entity, the Chumby.” A few different factors 
appeared to contribute to this. In daylight, the Chumby’s 
small LCD screen was only clearly readable from certain 
angles, so participants were unable to see it from some 
areas of the room where it was installed. In a few 
households, the Chumby was redundant because 
participants could also see the orb from most places where 
they could see the Chumby. Finally, the Chumbies used 
were pre-production models prone to technical glitches and 
service interruptions, so for nearly all of the participants the 
Chumby did not work properly for parts of the study. 
Nevertheless, the Chumby played an important part of the 
experience for certain participants: For example, A1 told us 
“Since I had [the Chumby] in the kitchen it was just while I 
was cooking...it was like ‘oh, I wonder who’s on.’ ”
# Para 493 1
Placement
# Para 494 15
As noted by others [8, 26], we found that the ambient 
displays needed to be located where they would frequently 
be seen. B1 mentioned, “The physical positioning in my 
house [for the Chumby] was the perfect spot, because I 
spend most of my day in the kitchen when I’m home.” In 
two households, participants chose locations for the 
Chumby where they rarely spent time or passed by. “The 
orb was a lot more helpful than the Chumby. [ ... ] Because 
we’re down here more.” (B2) A5 did not regard the 
displays as particularly useful. This may have been the 
result of physical context, as both were put in her brother’s 
bedroom. When we asked her if she ever saw the orb go 
purple when she wasn’t watching TV, she replied “Uh, no, 
because if I was in that room, I knew I’m gonna be 
watching TV.”
# Para 509 1
Acceptability of form factor
# Para 510 8
The majority of our participants liked the form factor of the 
displays. We received numerous comments such as “I love 
the orb” (B5), and “I like the orb, I like the Chumby... the 
colors and the blinking” (A2). A3 and A4 both called the 
orb “cool” and B4 said it was “neat.” Even when the 
novelty of the system wore off and some participants were 
saying that interacting with the on-screen application was a 
“chore” (B5), their enjoyment of the orb continued to the
# Para 518 4
end. It should be noted that the acceptance wasn’t universal; 
A1’s husband complained that the orb did not go with their 
décor, but “if it was a little bit smaller I think it would look 
fine.”
# Para 522 1
Drawing Users into Communication
# Para 523 13
Although the ambient devices provided effective social 
presence, our participants felt that the orb and Chumby 
would not be useful by themselves without the rest of the 
information the Social TV 2 system provided. “It would be 
pretty, but I couldn’t see what people were doing,” said A3. 
B1 commented that “There’d be no reason to have an orb 
and then I can’t turn it on and see who it’s connected to.” 
A2 thought that without the additional information of who 
was watching, and what they were watching, “it would be a 
tease.” Balancing this, several of our participants said that 
at times they were just interested in learning that a friend 
was at home and available, not specifically whether he or 
she was watching television.
# Para 536 11
We saw further evidence that the ambient information did 
help to involve them in the social television experience. 
Many of our participants told us of occasions when they 
turned on the TV because the orb indicated that others were 
watching. For example, A2 told us “as soon as I come into 
the house or I wake up or come into the room, that’s the 
first thing. It draws my attention, and the first thing I do is 
turn on the TV.” In a voice mail, A3 told us that the orb 
“has made me a little bit more aware, makes me want to, 
when it does change colors, to see which of my buddies are 
on.”
# Para 547 10
In some cases the participants switched on the TV just to 
see who was there, then turned it off. However, more often 
they would contact or be contacted by one of their friends, 
or simply go on watching the TV show. A2 told us that she 
would turn on the TV “just to see who’s on, and then most 
of the time we would all end up watching the same thing.” 
This usually involved exchanging lightweight messages: 
“Find out what other people are watching, flip to what 
they’re watching, and then talking to some of the people to 
throw comments out.” (B3)
# Para 557 11
In a number of cases, the people who described watching 
TV with their buddies and messaging them were people 
who were doing similar things prior to the study. For 
example, the sisters A2 and A5 told us that they often 
watched TV shows together, and A2 mentioned receiving a 
text message from her sister while they were both watching 
the season finale of Gilmore Girls. Regarding our system, 
she said: “The first thing I do is see what my buddies are 
watching, and then I tend to sometimes watch what they’re 
watching and then give suggestions or thumbs up or down 
depending on how I feel toward their program.”
# Para 568 4
Interestingly, people who used to watch TV with others 
remotely found themselves doing so again once the Social 
TV 2 system was in their homes. B 1 told us how, years ago, 
she and her close friend B2 would “watch Saturday Night
# Para 572 1
6
# Para 573 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Socio-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 574 1
8:01:48 PM B5 watching TV, B1 turns TV on
# Para 575 2
8:06:24 PM B5 joins B1 at Desperate Housewives 
8:07:00 PM B 1: “How are you?”
# Para 577 1
8:08:38 PM B5: “Good!”
# Para 578 4
8:09:05 PM B1: t, [thumbs-up] 
8:09:18 PM B5: t, [thumbs-up] 
8:10:20 PM B5: “I really like this!” 
8:17:26 PM B1: “Call me!”
# Para 582 1
Table 2: Sample interaction sequence from logs.
# Para 583 3
Live together,” while they talked on the phone. However, 
they haven’t done anything like that since their children 
were little. Until they participated in this study:
# Para 586 9
“I noticed the orb was blue, so I knew somebody had their 
television on, and sure enough, it was [B2’s household]. 
And I knew that her husband’s at work and her kids were at 
school, so I deduced it was [B2]. And so without even 
saying ‘Who’s there?’ I immediately went to her channel, 
which was Oprah, and I sent her a thumbs-up. And then 
she thumbs-upped me, and then two seconds later I said [to 
myself], ‘This is dumb!’ And then [I called her, and] we 
had a whole conversation.”
# Para 595 5
In this story, we can see that the ambient display serves to 
initially draw the participant into an interaction which then 
becomes progressively deeper, culminating in a direct voice 
conversation. This is a pattern we can see repeated with 
different variations in the logs (Table 2).
# Para 600 7
It should be pointed out that although turning the TV on in 
response to the orb was one of the most commonly reported 
behavior patterns in our study, some participants did not 
have a desire to turn on the television and dig deeper into 
the presence information. B3 said: “[The orb is] kind of 
interesting, but once again, what do I care if somebody is 
watching TV?”
# Para 607 7
Other participants were curious, but had little interest in 
talking about it. B2’s husband said he would “turn it on just 
to see what they’re watching, and then probably send them 
a message saying that ‘it sucks’ or something.” To put this 
in context, he rarely socializes around TV content anyway; 
although B1’s husband is his best friend, he has only once 
been over there to watch TV, for a Super Bowl party.
# Para 614 1
Meeting the Goal of Connectedness
# Para 615 10
Our participants reported that when they saw the ambient 
colors, they found themselves thinking about the fact that 
others were watching TV. In some cases this translated into 
a feeling that they could “know what’s going on,” (B2’s 
husband) with others in the study. Said A3: “I still think the 
orb is kinda the coolest part of the whole thing because it’s 
really neat to see it change color and then know that 
something is going on on the other end to cause it to do 
that.” The husband of A1 said: “Even before I turned on the 
TV, I knew that someone was on there.” B1 put it this way:
# Para 625 4
“I liked the different colors, I liked coming in the house and 
saying ‘oh, someone’s home watching TV too now.’ I don’t 
know, it was like a friendly feeling, like someone else is 
home and I’m not the only one home tonight.”
# Para 629 11
While B1 knew all the other participants in her trial, that 
was not true for the others. Participants on the periphery of 
the group could only imagine what it would be like to use 
the system with people closer to them. For example B5, 
who expressed dismay with the system overall, said “it’s a 
love connection. You have feelings for these people and 
you care more. My parents could be blue, my sisters could 
be pink, orange, green.” While B3 did not find the orb 
useful during the study, when she was asked if she would 
be more interested if the orb was telling her about different 
people, she answered:
# Para 640 7
“Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Probably. If it’s somebody I was 
closer to. [ ... ] It’s almost like a communication light 
bulb. You know what I mean? Like the fire bell goes off, 
and ‘Ding, ding, ding!’ If I saw that, I’d be ‘Hmm, Dad’s 
watching,’ or, I feel like ‘Hmm, I’m connecting with 
somebody.’ It sounds so stupid, but maybe you’re 
connecting with somebody.”
# Para 647 1
Inference and Learning about Presence
# Para 648 22
Despite the fact that our ambient displays only showed 
three colors, our participants were able to combine the 
information conveyed with previous social knowledge in 
order to draw rich inferences about the other people in the 
study. In some cases it inspired them to leaps of 
imagination, like when B2’s husband saw the orb turn blue 
when someone turned the TV on at 2 am: “I just figured 
somebody was watching, maybe fell asleep on the couch, 
maybe some guy got thrown out of the bedroom for the 
night.” At other times the speculations were more mundane, 
as when B 1 looked at the orb one morning: “The orb was 
yellow and no one was on, so I&apos;m assuming everyone was 
already at work.” This statement also exemplifies another 
use our participants found for the ambient information: 
Whether or not someone was watching TV was used as a 
proxy for whether they were home. Naturally, the presence 
information in the buddy list was a helpful supplement to 
the ambient devices for this purpose. A5 put it this way: 
“It’d be interesting when I’d be on at night, like ‘Oh, let me 
see if she’s on. Is she watching TV, is she home, is she 
out?’ So that was one way to know, ‘Yeah, she’s home, 
she’s watching TV.’ ”
# Para 670 11
We saw evidence that over the course of the study, our 
participants learned more about each other’s viewing habits, 
and used that knowledge to interpret the ambient signals 
with more confidence, guessing who might be on at any 
given time. Most of our participants knew little about the 
TV viewing habits of the rest of their group before the 
study commenced. To take just one example, A1 was only 
able to make general guesses about her friends’ viewing 
habits when the study started. At the end, on the other hand, 
she told us: “Yeah, I think as the two weeks progressed I 
kinda had a feel; like on Fridays I know [A4] works from
# Para 681 1
7
# Para 682 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 683 4
home so, like, this past Friday the light was blue, and I was 
like ‘the only person who’s going to be watching TV right 
now is her.’ So I kinda got a feel. Late night would be [A5], 
daytime would be [A3] because of the kids.”
# Para 687 13
By allowing participants to leverage their existing 
knowledge of one another to learn more detail about their 
viewing habits, the ambient information conveyed by Social 
TV 2 became more powerful. Participants were soon able to 
use the orb to glean (with some degree of uncertainty) 
information that they had initially needed to look up in the 
buddy list. One indication of the meaning that our 
participants attributed to the ambient devices’ output is the 
power the displays had to puzzle them. When B1 sat down 
to watch TV on a rainy evening, she noted to her surprise 
that no one else was logged on: “The oddest thing, it’s a 
nice night to be in... and not one person is on Social TV 
tonight!”
# Para 700 12
Presence seemed to lead to an expectation that someone 
who was watching TV was available for interaction. 
Unfortunately, our participants were often disappointed. B2 
told us in a voice mail: “We’ve not really heard back from 
people, the orb is blue, I don’t know if they’re getting them 
or if they’re just not sending back or what the problem is.” 
In the phone interview she said that when people weren’t 
responding, perhaps “they just wanted to watch their show, 
and they were ignoring you.” B1 said that when she notices 
the orb turning blue or purple and turns on the TV, she felt 
like “they’re on for a few minutes, we say hello, and then 
someone turns it off or they have to go.”
# Para 712 1
DISCUSSION
# Para 713 1
An Integral Component of Social TV 2
# Para 714 12
If we consider the ambient devices in isolation, they appear 
as fairly ordinary displays for peripheral presence 
awareness. And indeed, the results show that they 
successfully functioned as such. This, along with the fact 
that the orb, at least, was on the whole so well liked, goes 
some way towards validating our design, but it is not by 
itself a particularly novel finding. Far more interesting are 
the ways in which the ambient devices and the other Social 
TV 2 features interacted. Our findings reveal and hint at a 
number of interesting behaviors emerging, and these are 
particularly relevant to the design and understanding of 
future social systems in the home.
# Para 726 11
Our system was designed so that the ambient devices only 
worked while the Social TV 2 client remained connected to 
the network. And as we have noted, people, in general, 
liked the ambient lights, both because of the information 
they provided and for the aesthetic appeal. Although the 
design of our study didn’t allow us to conclusively test this, 
it does seem to indicate that the ambient devices would 
therefore encourage people to stay logged on, and serve as a 
reminder, if they ever do leave, to return as soon as 
possible, thereby ensuring the presence conduit remains 
open.
# Para 737 6
The orb and the Chumby were effective at conveying when 
other people were watching TV, and this allowed our 
participants to be aware of others’ availability even when 
their own TV sets were turned off and they were engaged in 
other activities. In this way, it reduced the risk of an 
opportunity for interaction going by unnoticed.
# Para 743 8
Together, these effects expand the interface between the 
system and the environment. For one thing, the chances of 
making contact are greatly increased. Also, the social 
television experience is no longer something that only takes 
place during the time you are actually watching TV. The 
ambient devices keep users engaged with the system while 
they go about other activities, thereby creating an ‘out-of-
the-box’ social experience.
# Para 751 1
Multiple Levels of Engagement
# Para 752 7
Our findings indicate that while it extended the social 
experience beyond the TV, the awareness provided by the 
ambient displays also helped draw our participants into the 
television experience and encourage them to use the 
system. This result supports previous efforts to use 
peripheral social awareness to lower the barriers to 
communication [17, 11].
# Para 759 12
We can generalize the steps reported by our users (and 
corroborated by the logs): the participants become aware of 
their friends’ availability through the ambient devices, turn 
on their TV (thereby themselves showing up as available to 
the other participants), look at their buddy list, and either 
join what one of their friends were watching or suggest that 
their friend join them. Once they were viewing together, 
they would usually send messages or emoticons, and 
sometimes this would culminate with a phone call. From 
this idealized flow, we can define different stages of 
interaction (Table 3). This can be viewed as an extension of 
Eggen et al.’s three interaction states [13].
# Para 771 19
We can see that as we move down the levels, the user 
becomes progressively more engaged with the experience, 
going from peripheral presence awareness to immersive 
participation through a number of intermediate levels. Part 
of the reason for this is that at each stage, the user has 
access to more detailed information. This is similar to a 
“ramping interface” model of information design and 
interaction [25], and allows users to drill down to the level 
they are interested in. In particular, each step provides more 
specific presence and richer contextual awareness. The 
ambient device provides only aggregate presence, and only 
conveys that a TV is on. The buddy list shows presence per 
household, and what they are watching. By watching the 
same thing, common ground is established, and by 
communicating it is possible to identify the other person at 
an individual level. However, the most interesting thing to 
note may be that as users become more deeply engaged, 
they also become increasingly present to, and eventually 
connected to, their buddies.
# Para 790 1
8
# Para 791 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 792 9
Interaction	Information	Presence specificity	Context detail	What others experience	Degree of
	amount				participation
Noticing ambient display	Bite	Aggregate buddy list (+inferences)	TV is on/off	No presence info	Peripheral awareness
					Full involvement
Viewing buddy list	Snack	Aggregate household (+inferences)	The program(s) being watched	TV is on/watching program	
Co-viewing program			Shared viewing context (common ground)	Sharing the viewing experience	
Exchanging lightweight messages	Meal	Aggregate	Reactions to show, responses to	In contact, communicating	
		household or individual	messages		
Talking on the phone	Feast	Individual	Two-way audio stream	Rich conversation	
# Para 801 1
Table 3: Different stages of interaction with the system, along with some notable characteristics.
# Para 802 6
Users can move freely between the various interaction 
levels, as their needs and interest dictate. However, each 
stage provides impulses that encourage deeper engagement, 
playing on such traits as curiosity and desire to express 
opinions, and guides users towards the ultimate state of live 
conversation, which here takes the form of phone calls.
# Para 808 1
Improving the Quality of Time Spent Watching TV
# Para 809 9
We see that the ambient information is intimately bound up 
with the social functionality available on the TV. Although 
our participants found the ambient data interesting in the 
context of the Social TV 2 system, the information would 
be nearly meaningless on its own; “a tease.” If the ambient 
displays extend the social television experience outside of 
the TV set, the other features help users interpret the 
ambient signals and provide the information with a purpose. 
They make it actionable.
# Para 818 13
Furthermore, as social presence information is made 
actionable through the TV, turning on the TV becomes 
redefined as a social act: “Even before I turned on the TV, I 
knew that someone was on there.” Because the ambient 
devices provide users with at least peripheral awareness of 
their buddies’ presence information, there is now an 
unavoidable social dimension to pressing that button, such 
as expectations of availability. And even if users should be 
oblivious, turning on the TV affects their buddies’ ambient 
displays and presence view, making them aware. We saw 
this social consideration give rise to new behaviors such as 
turning on the TV when the ambient devices showed other 
people online.
# Para 831 8
The methods of our study do not allow us to say with 
confidence whether Social TV 2 caused our participants to 
watch more TV, or keep their TV on more. For that, a 
control condition would be required. Certainly some of our 
findings suggest that it might be the case. However, in light 
of the above, direct comparisons may not be particularly 
meaningful. To watch Social TV 2 is not merely to 
consume entertainment, but to engage in communication
# Para 839 5
with friends and family that can bring you closer together, 
reaffirm social ties, and let you get to know each other 
better. The ambient displays provide a first point of contact 
for TV-based conversations, and help establish a social 
mindset around the very notion of television.
# Para 844 4
This insight suggests that different systems could use 
ambient displays to emphasize specific features, by 
preparing the user’s frame of mind in advance of their 
active interactions.
# Para 848 1
CONCLUSIONS
# Para 849 8
In this paper we have presented results from testing a social 
television system with an ambient component for social 
presence. On the whole, our participants liked the idea of 
having the TV watching activities of their social groups 
represented in ambient displays. Presence information was 
understood and used as a proxy for who was home and 
available. More importantly, it worked to support the 
experience of communicating through the television.
# Para 857 10
Most social television research to date has focused on what 
happens once people are engaged in a social television 
experience. There has been little research into how such 
sessions would be initiated, and how they can be made to fit 
into the context of everyday activities. Our study addresses 
these issues: Designs based on ambient displays offer a 
credible answer, and our field study showed one such 
design to perform well in practice. Since the same concerns 
are relevant to a wide class of other in-home social systems, 
this finding holds more general interest.
# Para 867 1
FUTURE WORK
# Para 868 8
One of the most interesting questions raised by this study is 
how the addition of social awareness will affect pre-existing 
patterns of behavior around TV viewing. The effect is 
profound, and some simple examples are clearly evident in 
the data. However, we suspect that the altered social 
dynamic of TV viewing could have far more complex and 
subtle effects, especially as the presence awareness 
increases the visibility of TV viewing habits to oneself and
# Para 876 1
9
# Para 877 1
CHI 2008 Proceedings · Soci-Cultural Impact	April 5-10, 2008 · Florence, Italy
# Para 878 2
others. Understanding these changes in perception and 
behavior is a rich area for further research.
# Para 880 9
While our data collection provided a great deal of 
qualitative information on how participants used Social TV 
2, we have no data on when participants were home, when 
they were in a room from which they could observe the 
ambient indicators, or who was using the system at any 
particular moment in time. This limits our ability to 
interpret the log data. In upcoming studies we plan to 
include a control condition, to provide a baseline against 
which changes in behavior can be detected.
# Para 889 12
We continue to iterate on the design of the Social TV 
prototype. Given the tendency of our participants to seek 
progressively deeper engagement and richer 
communication, we have now integrated support for voice 
and text chatting, and are currently preparing another field 
trial with these features included. We are also considering 
other form factors for the ambient devices, and changing 
the kinds of information these devices display. However, 
one change we are not going to make is eliminating the 
ambient information. Our findings spoke clearly to us about 
the attractive nature of ambient awareness, and we intend to 
keep using this feature to promote TV-based sociability.
# Para 901 1
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
# Para 902 3
We thank Ambient Devices, Inc. and Chumby Industries for 
providing the ambient devices, and Seonyoung Park and 
Elaine Huang for their contributions to the study and paper.
# Para 905 1
REFERENCES
# Para 906 3
1. Aipperspach, R., Rattenbury, T., Woodruff, A., Canny, J. 
(2006) A Quantitative Method for Revealing and 
Comparing Places in the Home. Proc. Ubicomp 2006.
# Para 909 2
2. Baillie, L., Fröhlich, P., Schatz, R. (2007) Exploring Social 
TV. In Proc. ITI 2007: 215–220.
# Para 911 2
3. Bernard, H.R. (1998) Handbook of Methods in Cultural 
Anthropology. Walnut Creek, CA : Altamira Press.
# Para 913 3
4. Beyer, H., &amp; Holtzblatt, K. (1998). Contextual design: 
Defining customer-centered systems. San Francisco, CA : 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
# Para 916 2
5. Boertjes, E. (2007) ConnecTV: Share the Experience. In 
EuroITV 2007 Adj. Proc.
# Para 918 3
6. Brown, B., Taylor, A., Izadi, S., Sellen, A., Kaye, J. (2007) 
Locating Family Values: A Field Trial of the Whereabouts 
Clock. In Proc. Ubicomp 2007.
# Para 921 2
7. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2006) American Time Use 
Survey. ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/news.release/atus.txt
# Para 923 3
8. Consolvo, S., Roessler, P., Shelton, B.E. (2004) The 
CareNet Display: Lessons Learned from an In Home 
Evaluation of an Ambient Display. Proc. Ubicomp 2004.
# Para 926 1
9. Coppens, T., Trappeniers, L. Godon, M. (2004).
# Para 927 2
AmigoTV: towards a social TV experience. In Proc. 
EuroITV 2004.
# Para 929 2
10. Crispell, D. (1997) “TV soloists – Statistics on number of 
television sets owned in households from SRI Consulting’s
# Para 931 2
Media Futures Program”, American Demographics, May 
1997.
# Para 933 3
11. DeGuzman, E.S., Yau, M., Gagliano, A., Park, A., Dey, 
A.K. (2004) Exploring the design and use of peripheral 
displays of awareness information. CHI 04 Ext. Abstracts.
# Para 936 3
12. Dey, A.K. and DeGuzman, E.S. (2006) From Awareness to 
Connectedness: The Design and Deployment of Presence 
Displays. In Proc. CHI ’06: 899–908.
# Para 939 3
13. Eggen, B., Rozendaal, M., Schimmel, O. (2003) Home 
Radio: Extending the Home Experience beyond the 
Physical Boundaries of the House. In Proc. HOIT 2003.
# Para 942 3
14. Geerts, D. (2006) Comparing voice chat and text chat in a 
communication tool for interactive television. In Proc. 
NordiCHI 2006: 461–464.
# Para 945 3
15. Harboe, G., Massey, N., Metcalf, C.J., Wheatley, D., 
Romano, G. (2008) The Uses of Social Television. In 
Comput. Entertain. 6, 1 (Jan 2008).
# Para 948 2
16. Harrison, C. and Amento, B. (2007) CollaboraTV – 
Making TV Social Again. In EuroITV 2007 Adj. Proc.
# Para 950 3
17. Hemmeryckx-Deleersnijder, B. and Thorne, J.M. (2007) 
Awareness and Conversational Context Sharing to Enrich 
TV Based Communication, In Proc. EuroITV 2007: 1–10.
# Para 953 3
18. Hindus, D., Mainwaring, S.D., Leduc, N., Hagström, A.E., 
Bayley, O. (2001) Casablanca: Designing Social 
Communication Devices for the Home. In Proc. CHI ’01.
# Para 956 3
19. LeCompte, M. and Schensul, J. (1999) Designing and 
Conducting Ethnographic Research. Walnut Creek, CA : 
Altamira Press.
# Para 959 2
20. Lull, J. (1990). Inside family viewing: Ethnographic 
research on television&apos;s audiences. London: Routledge.
# Para 961 3
21. Luyten, K., Thys, K., Huypens, S., Coninx, K. (2006) 
Telebuddies: Social Stitching with Interactive Television. 
In CHI 2006 Extended Abstracts.
# Para 964 3
22. Markopoulos, P., de Ruyter, B., Mackay, W.E. (2005) 
Awareness Systems: Known Results, Theory, Concepts 
and Future Challenges. CHI 05 Ext. Abstracts.
# Para 967 2
23. Oehlberg, L., Ducheneaut, N., Thornton, J. D., Moore, R. 
J., Nickell, E. (2006). Social TV: Designing for
# Para 969 2
Distributed, Sociable Television Viewing. In Proc. 
EuroITV 2006: 25–26.
# Para 971 3
24. Regan, T. and Todd, I. (2004) Media Center Buddies: 
Instant Messaging around a Media Center. In Proc. 
NordiCHI 2004: 141–144.
# Para 974 2
25. Rhodes, B. and Maes, P. (2000) Just-in-time information 
retrieval agents. IBM Systems Journal 39(3–4).
# Para 976 3
26. Rowan, J. and Mynatt, E. D. (2005) Digital Family Portrait 
Field Trial: Support for Aging in Place. In Proc. CHI ’05: 
521–530.
# Para 979 3
27. de Ruyter, B., Huijnen, C., Markopoulos, P., IJsselstein, 
W. (2003) Creating social presence through peripheral 
awareness. In Proc. HCI International 2003.
# Para 982 3
28. Vetere et al. (2005) Mediating Intimacy: Designing 
Technologies to Support Strong-Tie Relationships. In 
Proc. CHI ’05: 471–480.
# Para 985 3
29. Weisz, J. D., Kiesler, S., Zhang, H., Ren, Y., Kraut, R. E., 
Konstan, J. A. (2007) Watching together: integrating text 
chat with video. In Proc. CHI ’07: 877–886.
# Para 988 1
10
